Springer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
Fear over Friends: Examining the Perceived
Influence of Others on Vaccination Decisions
Denise Yewell1, R. Alexander Bentley2and Benjamin D.
Horne1*
1School of Information Sciences, University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, Knoxville, TN, USA.
2Anthropology Department, University of Tennessee, Knoxville,
Knoxville, TN, USA.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): bhorne6@utk.edu;
Contributing authors: dyewell@vols.utk.edu; rabentley@utk.edu;
Abstract
In this study, we examine the perceived influence of others, across both
strong and weak social ties, on vaccination decisions in the United
States. In particular, we focus on the case study of COVID-19 vac-
cinations. We add context to social influence by measuring related
concepts, such as perceived agreement of others and perceived danger
of COVID-19 to others. We find that vaccinated populations perceived
more influence from their social circles than unvaccinated populations.
This finding holds true across various social groups, including fam-
ily, close friends, co-workers, and neighbors. Indirect measures of social
influence also followed this trend. Vaccinated participants perceived
COVID-19 as more dangerous to their social circles than unvacci-
nated participants and perceived that others agreed with their decision
to get vaccinated more than unvaccinated participants perceived oth-
ers to agree with their decision to not get vaccinated. Despite the
clear differences in perceived social influence across the groups, we
find through open-ended responses that both vaccinated and unvacci-
nated participants frequently cited fear as a motivating factor in their
decision, rather than social influence: vaccinated participants feared
COVID-19, while unvaccinated participants feared the vaccine itself.
Keywords: social influence, vaccination, vaccine hesitancy, anti-vaccination
attitudes, community health, COVID-19
1arXiv:2404.01489v1  [cs.SI]  1 Apr 2024Springer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
2 Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions
1 Introduction
One thing learned from COVID-19 is that the spread of a pandemic in
nations around the world depended on not only on accurate epidemiological
information and government responses [1–8] but also the varied behaviors of
individuals, groups, and cultures [9–14]. Since culture is the context for behav-
ior [12, 15], and cultural values vary substantially across the world [2, 16, 17],
the effect of COVID-19 in terms of cases and deaths, was affected not only by
government actions but by cultural values in their populations [14].
These varied behaviors have been well studied, particularly early in the
COVID-19 pandemic, before vaccines were widely available. These studies have
used socioeconomic and public health variables to explain COVID-19 variation
within the United States [18, 19] and also globally [20]. In the context of the
literature on the effect of socioeconomic factors on COVID-19 [2–12], cultural
effects have been examined in concert with known risks such as obesity and
advanced age, together with variables describing government efficiency and
public trust in institutions [14, 19].
In terms of the behavioral dynamics of vaccination, those who are not vacci-
nated may feel less urgency due to a lowered perceived risk of infection [21–23].
Furthermore, even those infected with a coronavirus or flu, may not exhibit
obvious symptoms to others [24] and inadequate testing of populations [6] can
mean that the majority of infections in a population are undocumented [6, 24–
27]. This can lead individuals to underestimate the risk of a virus, especially in
lieu of more overt socio-economic concerns in people’s daily lives [28, 29]. Social
influence from peers may be weak because—unlike visible protections such
as mask-wearing or conspicuous lack of people in public spaces—vaccination
is often comparatively less visible. In this situation, the perceived benefits
of vaccination may be outweighed by economic and/or psychological costs
[9, 29–31].
The complexity of the levels of voluntary vaccination lies in the multi-
ple drivers of behavioral change, including information and social learning
[10, 11, 32–35]. Ideally, decisions would be determined by their intrinsic pay-
offs within their socio-ecological environment [36]. In the real world, decisions
are made by people who combine observational learning, which produces noisy
information, and social learning, which diffuses that information to others
[37, 38]. The transparency of learning is a crucial parameter [39]; the less
transparent the payoffs are, the more noise and heterogeneity enters into the
behavioral dynamics [40–42]. While humans are motivated to avoid cues associ-
ated with pathogens, through emotions such as fear or disgust [43], COVID-19
and similar viruses display few cues in asymptomatic cases [44].
These considerations suggest that drivers of social distancing include two
dynamic factors: observable risks and observable behaviors. In everyday life, we
may expect more intimate social influence, such as advice from parents or other
close family members, to be the strongest for vaccinations. Vaccination can be
made more visible of course through public outreach, but its acceptance will
vary based on group norms and potentially large differences in risk perceptionSpringer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions 3
due to misinformation. Acceptance may also vary based on a range of cultural
memory effects, such as the past misuse of vaccination on marginalized groups.
In contrast, if genuine benefits of vaccination become more transparent to the
public, individual cost-benefit decisions can support the behavior spreading
through social influence [11, 32, 45–47].
Here we examine one facet of this complex problem: the perceived social
influence of others on vaccination decisions. While prior work has shown that
social influence matters in an array of health-related decisions, including social
distancing and mask wearing during the COVID-19 pandemic [48], examining
social influence on COVID-19 vaccine decisions has had comparably less study,
particularly across strong and weak social ties. Hence, our work seeks to fill
this gap and add robustness to the current findings in the literature. More
broadly, further work in this area adds to our understanding of the interactions
between socio-cultural dynamics and health-related decision making.
Our four research questions are as follows:
•RQ1: Does the perception of social influence on vaccination decisions change
across vaccinated and unvaccinated populations?
•RQ2: Does the perception of social agreement with vaccination decisions
change across vaccinated and unvaccinated populations?
•RQ3: Does the perceived danger of COVID-19 to others change across
vaccinated and unvaccinated populations?
•RQ4: If not by social influence, what other reasons do vaccinated and
unvaccinated populations think influence their vaccination decision?
2 Methods
To answer our core research questions, we designed and deployed a survey on
the online survey platform Prolific (prolific.co). The survey contained ques-
tions on demographics, perceived influence of varying social circles, perceived
agreement of varying social circles, perceived danger of COVID-19 to varying
social circles, and an open-ended reasoning question.
On May 1st 2021, we deployed a pilot survey for 15 participants to measure
if our estimated survey time and payment amount were correct. There were
no issues found during the pilot, so the same payment parameters and ques-
tions were used in two more batches of survey deployment on May 2nd 2021.
The pilot survey was given to any Prolific user in the United States, whether
they had been vaccinated for COVID-19 or not. However, to ensure balance
of vaccinated and unvaccinated participants, we deployed the actual survey to
two pre-screened groups provided by Prolific: participants who were vaccinated
for COVID-19 and participants who were unvaccinated for COVID-19. Using
these two panels of participants, we deploy the survey for approximately 500
participants in each group. According to Prolific, 1,306 participants were eli-
gible to take our survey in the unvaccinated U.S. group and 8,569 participants
were eligible to take our survey in the vaccinated U.S. group.Springer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
4 Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions
The median time per participant in the pilot study was just over 3 minutes,
in the unvaccinated group study it was 4 minutes and in the vaccinated group
study it was 3 minutes. All participants lived in the United States and were
paid $1.00 for survey completion. This survey was approved by The University
of Tennessee’s IRB.
We provide details about each type of question below.
First, we collected several types of demographic information for comparison
to previous studies on COVID-19 vaccination and related behaviors. These
demographic questions included:
•Political leaning - We asked “What is your political leaning?” . Participants
could answer on a 5-point scale: very liberal ,liberal ,moderate ,conservative ,
orvery conservative .
•Rural-urban residency - We asked participants to provide the U.S. zip code in
which they currently reside. This question allowed us to map participants to
Rural-Urban Continuum Codes from the U.S. Department of Agriculture1.
Rural-Urban Continuum Codes range from 1 - counties in metro areas of 1
million population or more - to 9 - counties that are completely rural or less
than 2,500 urban population, not adjacent to a metro area.
•Rural-urban identity - Following the questioning used in [49], we asked
“Regardless of where you currently live, do you usually think of yourself as
a city person, a suburban person, a small-town person, a rural or country
person, or something else?”, giving us a 4-point scale from country person to
city person with something else as an outlier. According to [49], rural social
identification - “a psychological attachment to being from a rural area or
small town” - is different than “simply living in a rural area”. Lunz Trujillo
(2022) demonstrated this by showing that rural social identification predicts
greater anti-intellectualism than rural residency alone. Hence, in our study
we wanted to capture this psychological trait in addition to where one lives.
•Education - We asked “What is your level of education?”. Participants could
answer on a 7-point scale: less than high school ,high school graduate ,some
college ,2 year degree ,4 year degree ,professional degree ,doctorate .
•Income - We asked “What is your approximate household income?”. Par-
ticipants could answer on a 12-point scale: less than $10,000 tomore than
$150,000 .
•Gender - We asked “How do you describe yourself?”. Participants could
answer with one of four answers: male,female ,non-binary/third gender ,
prefer not to say .
•Race - We asked “What is your racial ethnicity?”. Participants could answer
with one of seven answers: white ,black ,Asian ,Hispanic or Latino ,native
American or Alaskan ,Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander , orother
Next, we asked participants “How much influence did each social group
have on your decision to get vaccinated?” or “ How much influence did each
social group have on your decision to not get vaccinated?” as a matrix Likert
1https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/rural-urban-continuum-codes.aspxSpringer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions 5
Scale question across five groups: family members ,close friends ,co-workers ,
church or social club , and neighbors or community members . Participants could
answer on a 5-point scale: none at all ,a little ,a moderate amount ,a lot, ora
great deal .
To add context to our question about social influence, we also asked par-
ticipants about social agreement with their vaccination decision and their
perceived danger of COVID-19 to others. Specifically, we asked participants
“How much do you think each social group agrees with your decision to get
vaccinated?” or “How much do you think each social group agrees with your
decision to not get vaccinated?” as a matrix Likert Scale question across five
groups: family members ,close friends ,co-workers ,church or social club , and
neighbors or community members . Participants could answer on a 3-point scale:
disagree ,do not care , or agree . We also asked participants “How likely do
you think members of each social group are to get severe COVID-19 or die
from COVID-19?” as a matrix Likert Scale question across five groups: fam-
ily members ,close friends ,co-workers ,church or social club , and neighbors or
community members . Participants could answer on a 5-point scale: extremely
unlikely ,somewhat unlikely ,neither likely nor unlikely ,somewhat likely , or
extremely likely .
Next, we wanted to understand both the size of participants social circles
and how much they trust members of their social circles. Hence, we asked
participants “To the best of your ability, type in the first names or relation-
ship titles (mother, best friend, cousin, co-worker, etc.) of each person you
voluntarily had a conversation with in the past week.” and “Of those people
you listed in the previous question, how many of them would you turn to for
advice with a major personal problem?” to approximate the number of people
they interact with on a regular basis and how much they trust those individu-
als. This line of questioning is similar to the questions asked in prior work to
approximate the size of one’s social circle [48, 50].
Lastly, we asked “In your own words, why did you get a COVID-19 vac-
cine?” or “In your own words, why did you not get a COVID-19 vaccine?”
as an open-ended question to elicit reasoning outside of our social influence
questions. Our goal with this question is to capture if participants primary
reasoning for getting or not getting vaccinated is indeed based on social cues
or if it is based on something else.
In the data analyzed, we use data from both the pilot deployment and
actual deployment, totalling to 1015 responses. After filtering out responses
that did not pass our attention check question, we had 1000 survey responses
to analyze between the three deployments, with 486 unvaccinated participants
and 514 vaccinated participants.
To analyze our ordered Likert Scale questions, we leverage ordinal logistic
regression. Each model uses an ordered categorical question as the dependent
variable and if the participant was in the vaccinated group or unvaccinated
group has the independent variable. This method allows us to estimate changes
in units of ordered logits between the two groups and if those changes areSpringer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
6 Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions
statistically significant. We describe this process in more detail in Section 3
and Table 1.
To analyze our open-ended reasoning question, we take a multi-round,
open-coding approach. First, two of the authors individually went over the
open-ended responses from the vaccinated group and the unvaccinated group
to identify broad codes, continuing until the list of codes was stable. The two
authors then discuss their codes to develop a combined list of codes, each
with specific definitions of what reasoning fits into the category. The final
set of codes can be found in Tables 3 and 4. Then the same two authors
coded all of the responses for both groups (vaccinated and not). Since the
respondents could describe as many reasons as they wanted, each participants
response could fall into more than one category. After the second round of
coding, agreement was computed, where a response is said to have agreement
if all codes match across the two coders. In the unvaccinated group, 79.84% of
the responses had full agreement, while the vaccinated group, 85.38% of the
responses had full agreement. The two authors met again to discuss and resolve
these conflicts. Disagreements in the unvaccinated group were mostly due to
interpreting what entity was being distrusted (science, government, media,
pharmaceutical companies, general), hence we merged these to a broader cat-
egory of Distrust . For example, some response were very specific: “Because
there’s not enough research to determine if it’s safe and I do not trust the
government or media.” while others were more general: “i dont trust any of
it”. Disagreements in the vaccinated group mostly were due to differentiating
the categories Protect others versus Right thing to do . In this case, we
opted for stricter definitions of each to avoid misinterpretation. For example, a
response had to use the phrase “it was the right thing to do” to be included in
the category Right thing to do , while calls to protecting others, such as “To
protect my family, community” or “I wanted to protect others from catching
Covid and help reduce the spread” were put in the category Protect others .
Definitions and examples of the final agreed upon results can be found in
Tables 2, 3, and 4.
Lastly, for our questions on social circle size and trust, we manually parse
and count the number of people listed by participants for each question. We
do this task manually as participants format these lists in a variety of ways,
making automated parsing prone to errors. The distributions of approximate
social circle size and social circle trust across the vaccinated and unvaccinated
groups are then analyzed quantitatively using a Mann-Whitney test.
3 Results
In Figure 2, we show the distributions of political leaning, rural-urban identity,
and education. These demographics and others are included in our ordinal
logistic regression analysis found in Table 1. Additionally, in Figure 1, we show
a map of the U.S. counties in which survey participants resided in at the time
of the survey.Springer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions 7
Fig. 1 U.S. counties where at least one survey participant resides. Participants in our survey
lived in 882 unique U.S. counties, with 471 counties represented in the vaccinated group and
461 counties represented in the unvaccinated group.
Fig. 2 Distributions of (a) political leaning, (b) rural-urban identity, and (c) education of
vaccinated and unvaccinated participants.
Across both the vaccinated and unvaccinated groups, participants
described themselves as 40.7% male, 57.01% female, and 2.02% non-
binary/third gender, and 86.1% white, 6.8% black, 3.5% Asian, 2.8% other, and
0.8% Native American. There were no significant differences found between
these demographics across the two groups.
There were significant differences across other demographic traits, such as
political leaning, rural-urban identity, rural residency, income, and education.
Specifically, vaccinated participants were significantly more left leaning, iden-
tified more as city/suburban people, lived in more urban areas, had higher
income, and more education.
These demographic differences align closely with results from previous
work. For example, reports from The COVID States project2found that peo-
ple who lived in city/suburban areas, had more education, and had higher
income, had significantly higher vaccination rates and greater support for vac-
cine requirements [51, 52]. Other studies have shown that rural residents are
“significantly less likely to participate in COVID-19-related preventive health
behaviors [53]” and that rural residents have higher rates of vaccine resistance
[51]. Further, as stated by Green et al. (2022), “partisanship remain[s] the
2https://www.covidstates.org/Springer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
8 Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions
most stable and sizable gap” in COVID-19 behaviors and attitudes [54]. Prior
work has shown that vaccine hesitancy is significantly higher for those who
identify as Republications than those who identify as Democrats [55–59]. The
demographic results from our survey provide further robustness to these prior
findings.
Next, we examine our core survey questions capturing the perceived influ-
ence of others on vaccine decisions and the perceived agreement of others with
vaccine decisions. In Table 1 we show the results of our ordinal logistic regres-
sion analysis over the perceived influence and agreement across theoretically
strong and weak social ties.
At a high level, no matter the social group, vaccinated participants
perceived significantly higher influence from others and significantly higher
agreement with others than participants who were not vaccinated. For exam-
ple, from Table 2, given that the coefficient estimates from our regression
analysis are given in units of ordered logits or ordered log odds, we can say
that for one unit increase in the independent variable (going from notoyes
for the question “Have you received one or both shots for COVID-19?”), we
expect a 1.0974 increase in the expected value of perceived influence of close
friends (ordered as a 5-point scale from None at all toA great deal ), meaning
that vaccinated participants perceived significantly more influence from their
close friends than participants who are unvaccinated. Similarly, we can say
that we expect a 2.2421 increase in the value of perceived agreement of close
friends with the participants vaccination decisions (ordered as a 3-point scale
from disagree toagree ), indicating vaccinated participants perceived that their
close fiends agreed with their decision to get vaccinated significantly more than
participants who were not vaccinated (i.e. close friends disagree with their
decision to not get vaccinated). The only exception to this finding is the per-
ceived influence of one’s ‘Church or Social club’ - which showed no significant
differences between the vaccinated and not vaccinated groups. Further, the
perceived influence and agreement weakens slightly (although not consistently)
as we move from theoretically stronger relationships to weaker relationships
(e.x. family to neighbors), yet statistically significant differences between the
vaccination groups still remain across the social circles.
These findings align with the findings of previous work. Tun¸ cgen¸ c et al.
(2021) showed that the perceived approval and adherence of others to social
distancing during COVID-19 predicted participant’s adherence to social dis-
tancing, particularly when others within one’s close social circle approved and
adhered to pandemic guidelines [48]. However, this study did not demonstrate
differences in perceived social influence between groups, rather the authors
demonstrated that there is a relationship between individual adherence and
perceptions of social circle adherence. We add nuance to this finding, by show-
ing perceptions of influence and approval may not be symmetrically across
groups (those who follow pandemic guidelines and those who do not).
Next, we examine how the perceived danger of COVID-19 to varying social
groups changes across vaccinated and unvaccinated participants. Specifically,Springer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions 9
we ask: “How likely do you think members of each social group are to get severe
COVID-19 or die from COVID-19?” - capturing an indirect social influence
rather than a direct influence. It is reasonable to assume that if one believes
COVID-19 is dangerous to their family and close friends, they may be more
likely to get vaccinated to protect them.
We find similarly divided results between the two groups. As shown in
Table 2, we find that across all social groups vaccinated participants perceived
COVID-19 as more dangerous to others than unvaccinated participants. While
there are some variations across social groups (i.e. perceiving family as in more
danger than close friends, etc.), those variations are not significantly different.
While to the best of our knowledge, perceived danger of COVID-19 to
specific social groups has not been studied, our results align with more general
findings in the literature. Many factors have been shown to predict COVID-
19 risk perceptions, such as personal experience with the virus and hearing
about the virus from friends and family [60]. Hearing about the virus through
friends and family was shown to be the strongest predictor of perceived risk,
where risk includes both risk of self and risk of others contracting the virus
[60]. Other non-social factors have also been shown to predict personal risk to
COVID-19, including psychological factors and institutional trust [60, 61].
(a) Family (b) Close Friends
(c) Co-workers (d) Neighbors
Fig. 3 Distributions of perceived influence on vaccination decision. Due to space restric-
tions, we leave out the plot for “Church or Social Club”. Note the changes in the x-axis
across the social groups.
We can further contextualize our findings by approximating the size of and
trust in participants social groups. While theoretically, our survey questions
measure differences across strong and weak social ties, the strength of theSpringer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
10 Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions
Demographics
Ordinal Question Coef 95% CI Interpretation
Political Leaning -1.94*** -2.19 to -1.69 More liberal
Rural-Urban Identity -0.64*** -0.87 to -0.41 More identify as city people
Rural-Urban Residency -0.44*** -0.68 to -0.21 Live in more urban areas
Income 0.63*** 0.42 to 0.85 Higher income
Education 0.95*** 0.72 to 1.18 More educated
Perceived Influence
Ordinal Question Coef 95% CI Interpretation
Family 1.07*** 0.84 to 1.31 More influenced
Close friends 1.10*** 0.84 to 1.35 More influenced
Co-workers 1.07*** 0.73 to 1.40 More influenced
Church or Social club 0.38 -0.06 to 0.82 No difference
Neighbors 1.22*** 0.86to 1.59 More influenced
Perceived Agreement
Ordinal Question Coef 95% CI Interpretation
Family 1.93*** 1.64 to 2.22 More agreement
Close friends 2.24*** 1.95 to 2.53 More agreement
Co-workers 1.91*** 1.62 to 2.21 More agreement
Church or Social club 1.05*** 0.77 to 1.33 More agreement
Neighbors 1.77*** 1.46 to 2.07 More agreement
Perceived Danger of COVID-19
Ordinal Question Coef 95% CI Interpretation
Family 0.68*** 0.46 to 0.91 More dangerous
Close friends 0.49*** 0.26 to 0.71 More dangerous
Co-workers 0.66*** 0.43 to 0.89 More dangerous
Church or Social club 0.83*** 0.60 to 1.07 More dangerous
Neighbors 0.84*** 0.61 to 1.07 More dangerous
Table 1 Results from 20 ordinal regression models, where being vaccinated is the
independent variable. If the 95% CI does not cross 0, the parameter estimate is statistically
significant, also shown by the p-value. Note, that *** indicates p <0.001 and ** indicates
p <0.01. The coefficient estimates provided are given in units of ordered logits, or ordered
log odds. So, for example, for the independent variable - ‘Have you received one or both
shots for COVID-19?’ and the dependent variable ‘What is your political leaning?’- we
would say that for a one unit increase in the IV (i.e., going from ‘No’ to ’Yes’), we expect a
−1.94 decrease in the expected value of political leaning (ordered as Very Liberal toVery
Conservative ) on the log odds scale, meaning vaccinated participants were more politically
liberal. The interpretation column indicates a trait of vaccinated participants.
ties between participants and these groups likely changes across individuals.
Hence, here we utilize the answers to the questions asked about voluntary
conversations participants had within the past week and the county in which
participants lived during the pandemic, as described in the methods section
above.Springer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions 11
We find that on average, participants in the unvaccinated group had con-
versations with 4.02 people (median 4 people, standard deviation 2.45) in the
week prior to the survey and trusted 2.27 of them (median 2 people, standard
deviation 1.64). On average, participants in the vaccinated group had conver-
sations with 5.26 people (median 4 people, standard deviation 4.83) in the
week prior to the survey and trusted 2.76 of them (median 3 people, standard
deviation 2.03). Both groups trusted about 60% of those they had conversa-
tions with in the past week, with 60.91% trusted in the vaccinated group and
60.60% trusted in the unvaccinated group. Note, these approximate social cir-
cle size numbers align with both pre-pandemic and during-pandemic numbers,
which both showed a median close circle size of 4 people [48, 62].
To better measure differences between the two groups, we perform a
Mann-Whitney test on each pair of distributions, finding significant differ-
ences between approximate social circle size (pvalue=1.6301e-07) and the
number of individuals trusted (pvalue=1.8238e-05), but no significant dif-
ference was found between the proportion of social circle members trusted
(pvalue=0.9807). Hence, vaccinated participants interacted with slightly more
people than unvaccinated, but trust in those people is no different between the
groups.
As another proxy for the number of people participants encounter, we can
also look at the areas of the U.S. in which participants live. Overall, 51.62% of
participants, resided in metro areas with 1 million population or more (RUCC
1). More broadly, 86.36% of participants lived in metro counties (RUCCs 1
through 3) and only 13.64% lived in nonmetro counties (RUCCs 4 through
9). Of the vaccinated participants, 57.25% of participants, resided in metro
areas of 1 million population or more, 89.02% lived in metro counties, and
10.98% lived in nonmetro counties. Of the unvaccinated participants, 45.63%
of participants, resided in metro areas of 1 million population or more, 83.54%
lived in metro counties, and 16.46% lived in nonmetro counties.
As shown in Table 1, when examining rural-urban residency using an
ordered logistic regression model, we find that the vaccinated participants live
in more urban areas than unvaccinated participants. Precisely, for one unit
increase in the independent variable (going from notoyesfor the question
“Have you received one or both shots for COVID-19?”), we expect a -0.4429
decrease in the expected value of RUCC (ordered as a 9-point scale from 1 to
9), which is statistically significant.
Hence, both the approximations of the number of people participants inter-
acted with prior to the survey (social circle size and residency) suggest that
the vaccinated population interacted with more people than the unvaccinated
population did. Theoretically, it makes sense that interacting with less peo-
ple can impact one’s perceptions of COVID-19, as interacting with less people
reduces the chance that one comes in close contact with someone who had been
severely ill from COVID-19. In general, this idea is supported in the literature.
For example, when studying vaccine messaging strategies, it was found thatSpringer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
12 Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions
“messages evoking harm reduction and people you know were more effective
in counties where the virus is spreading more quickly. [63]”
There are likely other confounding factors related to location that may
have a significant impact on one’s pandemic-related decisions. For example,
prior work has demonstrated that local news coverage during 2020 and 2021
was best explained by national trends rather than by local conditions, and the
themes of that coverage varied across counties in the U.S. [64]. Further, we
know that there were urban-rural differences in COVID-19 behaviors, and that
those behaviors changed depending on the news produced locally. Specifically,
Kim et al. (2020) showed that “rural residents [were] more likely to engage in
social distancing behavior than otherwise similar rural residents if their local
news [was] produced in a city that is more impacted by COVID-19” [65]. Other
work has shown wide variations in vaccine support across areas in the United
States [56].
Vaccinated Not Vaccinated
Category % of Responses Category % of Responses
Protect Self 74.27% Fear of Vaccine 36.65%
Protect Others 54.77% Natural Immunity 7.41%
Trust in Science 14.81% Distrust 6.24%
Employer Mandate 2.53% Not True Vaccine 13.26%
Return to Normal 7.41% Apathy 7.02%
Social Pressure 2.73% Restricted Access 6.63%
Trust in Social Circle 1.75% Low Risk of COVID-19 21.64%
The Right Thing to Do 5.85% Infringement on Rights 2.73%
Other 2.14% Conspiracy Theory 5.26%
Other 2.53%
Table 2 Percentage of responses that fit into each category across vaccination groups.
Note, responses could use multiple categories of reasoning. Hence, the percentages will not
add up to 100%. For definitions of each category, see Tables 4 and 3.
Lastly, to capture reasoning that may not have been addressed by our
ordinal-scaled questions, we ask an open ended question to all participants: “In
your own words, why did you (not) get a COVID-19 vaccine?”. As discussed in
Section 2, we take an open-coding approach to group responses into categories.
The final set of categories and corresponding percentage of responses in the
category can be found in Table 2. Detailed definitions of each category can be
found in Tables 4 and 3.
On average, participants in the unvaccinated group wrote more, produc-
ing 140.18 characters on average (maximum 1651 characters, minimum 7
characters) compared to only 89.77 characters on average in the vaccinated
group (maximum 760 characters, minimum 12 characters). This often meant
that participants in the unvaccinated group were listing many more reasons
(or used very complex reasoning) for not getting vaccinated than vaccinated
participants did for getting vaccinated.Springer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions 13
The most frequent reason used by unvaccinated participants to not get
vaccinated was fear of the vaccine, including fear of the vaccine itself or its
side effects (36.65% of responses). For example:
“I was concerned about the side effects and cost of possible medical treatment.
I’ve reacted horribly to both the tetanus vaccine and flu vaccine.”
“I am worried about potential side effects (mainly about long-term ones which are
still currently unknown) and I don’t like needles.”
“I do not believe the benefits outweigh the risks.”
“The vaccine is dangerous and proven not to be 100% effective against the virus.
And COVID is nothing more than the flu.”
The second most frequent reason expressed was a perceived low risk of
catching or becoming seriously ill from COVID-19 (21.64% of responses), align-
ing with the results from our ordinal question on the perceived dangers of
COVID-19 to others.
Other reasons expressed included: claims that the vaccine was “not a
true vaccine” (13.26% of responses), claims of natural immunity (7.41% of
responses), distrust in institutions (6.24% of responses), and one or more con-
spiracy theories (5.26% of responses). As with many of the responses from the
unvaccinated participants, multiple of these categories were used together. For
example, often there were overlaps between the categories Ineffective/Not
True Vaccine andDistrust andConspiracy Theory ; such as:
“It’s not a vaccine, it’s a biologic jab intended to kill people.”
“You would have to be a fool to not see it for what it is at this point. I did not
get it because it’s poison, intentional... technological... poison. Used to kill and
control. And part of a larger agenda to get us used to passports, digital IDs and
social credit.”
“I do not trust the efficacy of the mRNA technology. I do not trust pharmaceutical
companies that attempt to hide the results of trials for decades and have been
granted total immunity from prosecution. I believe that adverse reactions have
been underreported. I think the silencing and censoring of certain immunologists
and virologists that have doubts about mRNA, and a substantial contingent of
the medical community advocating for lockdowns and isolation except for massive
gatherings for ”racial justice” have seriously weakened my level of trust in the
scientific and medical communities as a whole. I combine this with the illogical
insistence that ”masks work” despite overwhelming evidence that any type of face
covering beyond type n-95 is ineffective.”
“They are not real vaccines yet. Takes a few years. The side effects and deaths are
extreme with many being hidden. Once one is made that actually is an immunology
then I will look into it further. Right now it is a jab of chemicals.”
“They are all under tested and mRNA vaccines were already deemed not safe for
human trial due to mass death and vaccine indused autoimmune immune deficiency
in all animal test groups. Good luck with that.”Springer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
14 Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions
Some of these findings align with prior work. For example, research from
The COVID States project demonstrated that “the biggest expressed concern
of the unvaccinated is the safety of the COVID-19 vaccines” and that the
unvaccinated population is “more likely to be skeptical of the efficacy and
safety of vaccines” [66]. Further, as others have argued, misinformation and
conspiracy theories can play a role in COVID-19 decision making [67].
Overall, vaccinated participants expressed very different reasons for getting
vaccinated than unvaccinated participants expressed for not getting vacci-
nated. The vast majority of vaccinated participants stated that they chose to
get vaccinated to protect themselves and protect others (74.27% of responses
contained protect self and 54.77% contained protect others), and typically
used very short, simple reasoning. For example, the majority of the responses
looked like the following:
“To protect myself and my family, community.”
“To protect myself and others”
Other less frequent reasons by vaccinated participants included trust in sci-
ence (14.81% of responses), desire to return to normal (7.41% of responses),
and getting vaccinated being “the right thing to do” (5.85% of responses).
Notably, participants explicitly stating they got vaccinated due to trusting in
their social circle, either through direct advice from social circle, a request
to get vaccinated from social circle, or family members also getting vacci-
nated, only was present in 1.75% of responses. Further, social pressure, both
directly from social circles or indirectly from social norms, was mentioned
in only 2.73% of responses. Hence, while perceived social influence was high
amongst vaccinated participants, it may not be the primary reasoning behind
the decision.
4 Discussion
In this study, we found that vaccinated participants perceived more influence
from and agreement with others than unvaccinated participants. The vacci-
nated population also perceived COVID-19 as more dangerous to others than
the unvaccinated population did. For context, we approximated that partic-
ipants in the vaccinated population had larger social circles on average and
lived in more densely populated areas. Hence, vaccinated participants had a
higher likelihood of interacting with someone who had been severely ill or died
from COVID-19 than unvaccinated participants. These results expand upon
and add robustness to the findings of prior work on social influence during
pandemic and epidemics [48].
In contrast, social influence does not seem significant in deciding not to
be vaccinated. In open-ended responses, unvaccinated participants most fre-
quently cited fear of the vaccine and distrust in the institutions who make and
support the vaccines.Springer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions 15
While the primary goal of this study was to examine social influence, it is
clear that social influence is not the only mechanism of impression in decision
making. Other factors not directly measured in this study that likely also
play a role in vaccination decisions include media consumption [64, 68–70] and
individual, generational, and cultural memory [71–73]. Our qualitative results
support this notion.
Notably, despite vaccinated participants citing social influence at varying
levels in their open-ended responses, they too were motivated by fear, fre-
quently citing that they got vaccinated to protect themselves or to avoid dying
from COVID-19.
Fear and anxiety being a driver of health-related decision making is well-
supported in the literature [74–76], including behaviors during the COVID-19
pandemic. For example, Harper et al. (2021) found that from a sample of 324
people from the U.K. that “the only predictor of positive behavior change
(e.g., social distancing, improved hand hygiene) was fear of COVID-19 [77]”,
including when controlling for political and ideological variables. When fear
and anxiety motivates vaccination, this fear is functional (as Harper et al.
(2021) puts it), but, as our study suggests, when fear and anxiety motivates not
getting vaccinated, the fear may be counterproductive and even detrimental.
In conclusion, we found that vaccinated populations perceived more influ-
ence from their social circles than unvaccinated populations. This finding held
true across various social groups, including family, close friends, co-workers,
and neighbors. Similarly, we found that vaccinated participants perceived that
others agreed with their decision to get vaccinated significantly more than
unvaccinated participants perceived that others agreed with their decision to
not get vaccinated. Indirect measures of social influence also followed this
trend. Vaccinated participants perceived COVID-19 as more dangerous to their
social circles than unvaccinated participants. Despite the clear differences in
perceived social influence across the groups, we found through open-ended
responses that both vaccinated and unvaccinated participants frequently cited
fear as a motivating factor in their decision: vaccinated participants feared
COVID-19, while unvaccinated participants feared the vaccine itself. Together,
our results expand the current literature on vaccination behavior and add
robustness to several previous findings.
5 Limitations
While we are confident in the results presented in this study, it is not without
limitations. First, our work is limited in its reliance on self-reported/perceived
effects - it is unlikely that perceived influence perfectly correlates with actual
influence, which may happen passively or unconsciously. A report from Altay et
al. (2022) shows a clear example of this effect, stating that “[c]onspiracy believ-
ers were more likely to report relying less on social information than actually
relying less on social information in the behavioral tasks” [78]. Our focus inSpringer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
16 Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions
this work is not on conspiracy believers; however, the general premise of report-
ing the use of social information versus actual reliance on social information
still applies. From this view, it may be that both vaccinated and unvaccinated
populations rely on social information, but unvaccinated populations report
using less of it than vaccinated populations.
Second, as a whole, the survey data are not from a representative sample
of the U.S. population, as clearly shown by the racial demographics in Section
3. This bias is due to our method of balanced sampling across the vaccinated
and unvaccinated groups. Systematically sampling this imbalanced variation
allowed us to capture both vaccinated and unvaccinated people’s perceptions
fairly. While this survey could be re-deployed on a truly representative sam-
ple the U.S. population, there would be an imbalance in vaccinated versus
unvaccinated participants, as the majority of the U.S. population is vacci-
nated. Despite this limitation, our survey did cover a broad set of counties and
demographics.
Vaccinated
Category Definition
Protect Self Protecting self, to avoid bad illness, or to avoid death
Protect Others Protecting others, including family, friends, community,
neighbors, or “others”
Trust in Science Specific mentions of trust in the science or vaccines
Employer Mandate Specific mentions of employer mandate or job prospects
Desire to Return to Normal Specific mentions of “return to normal”
Social Pressure Various forms of social pressure, such as specific mentions
of social pressure or indirect statements like: “not to look
like an anti-vaxxer” or “not to be socially unacceptable”
Trust in Social Circle Conversations with family or friends, family member ask-
ing them to get vaccinated, family member also getting
vaccinated, etc.
The Right Thing to Do Specific mentions of getting vaccinated being “right thing
to do”
Other Response doesn’t fit into above categories
Table 3 Qualitative Code Book definitions for the vaccinated group
Funding: Participants in this study were paid through internal funds in the School
of Information Sciences at UTK. No external funding was used for this study.
Ethical Approval: All research was performed in accordance with relevant guide-
lines/regulations applicable when human participants are involved (DeclarationSpringer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions 17
Not Vaccinated
Category Definition
Fear of Vaccine Fear of the vaccine itself or the side effects from it. Some
mention being afraid of dying from the vaccine, such as
“There have been severe side effects and death after the
vaccine.”
Natural Immunity Specific mentions of having “natural immunity” includ-
ing because of having COVID-19 already, because they
take supplements, because “God” gave them an “immune
system”, or belief that they “can fight COVID-19 off
naturally”
Not True Vaccine Statements of two general forms: 1. The vaccine is inef-
fective because people can get COVID-19 after being
vaccinated, or 2. The belief that the vaccine is ”not a true
vaccine” for reasons related to “mRNA” not being a “true
vaccine” or because it doesn’t always prevent catching
COVID-19
Distrust Specific mentions of distrusting science, the media, the
government, “big pharma”, or “it”
Apathy Did not care to get it or did not have time
Restricted Access Participants have the intention to get the vaccine, but can-
not due to health issues, lack of transportation, or family
member not allowing them to get vaccinated
Low Risk of COVID-19 Participant believes they are not at risk of getting COVID-
19 or getting severely ill from COVID-19
Infringement on Rights Participant did not get vaccinated because they do not like
“being forced” to get vaccinated or out of the principle
that “mandates are unacceptable in a free and democratic
society”
Conspiracy Theory Reasoning using one or more conspiracy theories, where
there is a secret, over-arching, malicious plot by power-
ful groups of people against those not in power, many are
framed around blaming democrats, general government, or
the media
Other Response doesn’t fit into above categories
Table 4 Qualitative Code Book definitions for the unvaccinated group
of Helsinki). The research was approved by The University of Tennessee-
Knoxville Human Research Protections Program (HRPP), which determined
that the application was eligible for exempt status under 45 CFR 46.104.d,
Category 2 ( https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/regulations/45-cfr-46/
revised-common-rule-regulatory-text/index.html#46.101 ). Our application was determined
to comply with proper consideration for the rights and welfare of human subjectsSpringer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
18 Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions
and the regulatory requirements for the protection of human subjects.
Informed consent: As per the IRB application, informed consent was acquired
from all participants in this survey. All participants were adults living the United
States.
Author’s contribution: DY: original idea, survey design, qualitative analysis.
RAB: writing, literature review. BDH: survey design, quantitative analysis, qualita-
tive analysis, writing, literature review.
Conflict of interest: The authors have no competing interests related to this work.
Data availability statement: Due to the sensitive nature of survey data, the data
used in this study is only available upon request.
Supplementary information Additional figures are provided in the Supplemental
materials.
References
[1] Prather KA, Wang CC, Schooley RT. Reducing transmission of SARS-
CoV-2. Science. 2020;368:1422–1424. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
abc6197.
[2] Aksoy CG, Ganslmeier M, Poutvaara P. Public attention and policy
responses to COVID-19 pandemic. IZA Discussion Papers. 2020;13427.
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3643191.
[3] Hale T, Petherick A, Phillips T, Webster S. Variation in Govern-
ment Responses to COVID-19. Oxford Blavatnik School of Government
Working Papers. 2020;BSG-WP-2020/031.
[4] Bedford J, Enria D, Giesecke J, Heymann D, Ihekweazu C, Kobinger
G, et al. COVID-19: towards controlling of a pandemic. The Lancet.
2020;395:1015–1018. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30673-5.
[5] Frey CB, Chen C. Democracy, Culture, and Contagion: Political Regimes
and Countries Responsiveness to Covid-19; 2020. .
[6] Munster VJ, Koopmans M, van Doremalen N, van Riel D, de Wit
E. A novel coronavirus emerging in China—key questions for impact
assessment. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020;382(8):692–694.
[7] Chowell G, Mizumoto K. The COVID-19 pandemic in the USA: What
might we expect? The Lancet. 2020;395:1093–1094.
[8] Zhang QB Weituo and. Making decisions to mitigate COVID-19 with
limited knowledge. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2020;20:1121–1122.Springer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions 19
[9] Maharaj S, Kleczkowski A. Controlling epidemic spread by social
distancing: Do it well or not at all. BMC Public Health. 2012;12(1):679.
[10] Funk S, Salath´ e M, Jansen VAA. Modelling the influence of human
behaviour on the spread of infectious diseases: a review. J R Soc Interface.
2010;106:1247–1256.
[11] Guiteras R, Levinsohn J, Mobarak A. Encouraging sanitation invest-
ment in the developing world: A cluster-randomized trial. Science.
2015;348:903–906.
[12] Zhang J, Centola D. Social networks and health: new developments in
diffusion, online and offline. Annual Review of Sociology. 2019;45:91–109.
[13] Gharzai LA, Beeler WH, Jagsi R. Playing into Stereotypes: Engag-
ing Millennials and Generation Z in the COVID-19 Pandemic Response.
Advances in Radiation Oncology. 2020;.
[14] Ruck DJ, Borycz J, Bentley RA. Cultural values predict national COVID-
19 death rates. Springer Nature Social Sciences. 2021;1:article 74.
[15] Gelfand MJ, Jackson JC, Pan X, Nau DS, Pieper D, Denison E, et al. The
relationship between cultural tightness–looseness and COVID-19 cases
and deaths: a global analysis. The Lancet Planetary Health. 2021;5:e135
– e144.
[16] Inglehart R, Welzel C. Modernization, Cultural Change, and Democracy:
The Human Development Sequence. Cambridge University Press.; 2005.
[17] Ruck DJ, Matthews LJ, Kyritsis T, Atkinson QD, Bentley RA. The
cultural foundations of modern democracies. Nature Human Behaviour.
2019;4:265–269.
[18] Desmet K, Wacziarg R. Understanding Spatial Variation in Covid-19
Across the United States. CEPR Discussion Paper Series. 2020;.
[19] Ruck DJ, Bentley RA, Borycz J. Early warning of vulnerable counties
in a pandemic using socio-economic variables. Economics and Human
Biology. 2021;41:100988 – 100988.
[20] de Oliveira RP, alberto Achcar J, Nunes AA. Modeling the incidence
and death rates of COVID-19 pandemic in different regions of the world.
Epidemiologic Methods. 2020;9.
[21] Verelst F, Willem L, Beutels P. Behavioural change models for infectious
disease transmission: a systematic review (2010–2015). Journal of The
Royal Society Interface. 2016;13(125):20160820.Springer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
20 Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions
[22] Fineberg HV. The paradox of disease prevention: celebrated in principle,
resisted in practice. Jama. 2013;310(1):85–90.
[23] Jansen VA, Stollenwerk N, Jensen HJ, Ramsay M, Edmunds W, Rhodes
C, et al. Measles outbreaks in a population with declining vaccine uptake.
Science. 2003;301(5634):804–804.
[24] Li R, Pei S, Chen B, et al. Substantial undocumented infection facilitates
the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV2)[published
online ahead of print March 16, 2020]. Science;10.
[25] Bendavid E, Mulaney B, Sood N, Shah S, Ling E, Bromley-Dulfano
R, et al. COVID-19 Antibody Seroprevalence in Santa Clara County,
California. medRxiv. 2020;.
[26] Baud D, Qi X, Nielsen-Saines K, Musso D, Pomar L, Favre G. Real esti-
mates of mortality following COVID-19 infection. The Lancet infectious
diseases. 2020;20(7):773.
[27] Marchant R, Samia NI, Rosen O, Tanner MA, Cripps S. Learning as we
go: An examination of the statistical accuracy of COVID19 daily death
count predictions. arXiv preprint arXiv:200404734. 2020;.
[28] Mani A, Mullainathan S, Shafir E, Zhao J. Poverty impedes cognitive
function. science. 2013;341(6149):976–980.
[29] Trueblood J, Sussman A, O’Leary D, Holmes W. A tale of two crises:
Financial constraint and perceptions of COVID-19. 2020;.
[30] Pritchard AJ, Silk MJ, Carrignon S, Bentley RA, Fefferman NH. Balanc-
ing timeliness of reporting with increasing testing probability for epidemic
data. Infectious Disease Modelling. 2022;7:106 – 116.
[31] Greenstone M, Nigam V. Does social distancing matter? University
of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper.
2020;(2020-26).
[32] Carrignon S, Bentley RA, Silk MJ, Fefferman NH. How social learning
shapes the efficacy of preventative health behaviors in an outbreak. PLoS
ONE. 2022;17.
[33] Christakis NA, Fowler JH. Social contagion theory: examining
dynamic social networks and human behavior. Statistics in medicine.
2013;32(4):556–577.
[34] Bentley RA, Earls M, O’Brien MJ. I’ll have what she’s having: Mapping
social behavior. MIT Press; 2011.Springer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions 21
[35] Silk MJ, Carrignon S, Bentley RA, Fefferman NH. Observations and
conversations: how communities learn about infection risk can impact
the success of non-pharmaceutical interventions against epidemics. BMC
Public Health. 2022;22.
[36] Gibson MA, Lawson DW. Applying evolutionary anthropology. Evolu-
tionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews. 2015;24(1):3–14.
[37] Hoppitt W, Laland KN. Social learning: an introduction to mechanisms,
methods, and models. Princeton University Press; 2013.
[38] Rendell L, Boyd R, Enquist M, Feldman MW, Fogarty L, Laland
KN. How copying affects the amount, evenness and persistence of cul-
tural knowledge: insights from the social learning strategies tournament.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences.
2011;366(1567):1118–1128.
[39] Hauser OP, Rand DG, Peysakhovich A, Nowak MA. Cooperating with
the future. Nature. 2014;511(7508):220–223.
[40] Li J, Lee LF. Binary Choice under Social Interactions: An Empirical
Study with and without Subjective Data on Expectations. Journal of
Applied Econometrics. 2009;24(2):257–281.
[41] Caiado CC, Brock WA, Bentley RA, O’Brien MJ. Fitness landscapes
among many options under social influence. Journal of Theoretical
Biology. 2016;405:5–16.
[42] Vidiella B, Carrignon S, Bentley RA, O’Brien MJ, Valverde S. A cultural
evolutionary theory that explains both gradual and punctuated change.
Journal of the Royal Society Interface. 2022;19:20220570. https://doi.
org/10.1098/rsif.2022.0570.
[43] Schrock JM, Snodgrass JJ, Sugiyama LS. Lassitude: The emotion of being
sick. Evolution and Human Behavior. 2020;41(1):44–57.
[44] Kronbichler A, Kresse D, Yoon S, Lee KH, Effenberger M, Shin JI.
Asymptomatic patients as a source of COVID-19 infections: A system-
atic review and meta-analysis. International journal of infectious diseases.
2020;98:180–186.
[45] Silk MJ, Carrignon S, Bentley RA, Fefferman NH. Improving pandemic
mitigation policies across communities through coupled dynamics of risk
perception and infection. Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 2021;288.
[46] Pritchard AJ, Silk MJ, Carrignon S, Bentley RA, Fefferman NH. How
reported outbreak data can shape individual behavior in a social world.Springer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
22 Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions
Journal of Public Health Policy. 2022;43:360 – 378.
[47] Banerjee A, Chandrasekhar AG, Duflo E, Jackson MO. The diffusion of
microfinance. Science. 2013;341(6144):1236498.
[48] Tun¸ cgen¸ c B, El Zein M, Sulik J, Newson M, Zhao Y, Dezecache G, et al.
Social influence matters: We follow pandemic guidelines most when our
close circle does. British Journal of Psychology. 2021;112(3):763–780.
[49] Lunz Trujillo K. Rural Identity as a Contributing Factor to Anti-
Intellectualism in the US. Political behavior. 2022;p. 1–24.
[50] Dunbar RI, Spoors M. Social networks, support cliques, and kinship.
Human nature. 1995;6(3):273–290.
[51] Lazer D, Ognyanova K, Baum MA, Druckman J, Green J, Gitomer A,
et al. The COVID States Project# 43: COVID-19 vaccine rates and
attitudes among Americans. OSF Preprints. 2021;10.
[52] Baum M, Quintana A, Simonson MD, Lazer D, Ognyanova K, Chwe
H, et al. The COVID States Project# 52: Public support for vaccine
requirements. 2021;.
[53] Callaghan T, Lueck JA, Trujillo KL, Ferdinand AO. Rural and urban dif-
ferences in COVID-19 prevention behaviors. The Journal of Rural Health.
2021;37(2):287–295.
[54] Green J, Druckman JN, Baum MA, Lazer D, Ognyanova K, Simonson
MD, et al. Using general messages to persuade on a politicized scientific
issue. British Journal of Political Science. 2022;p. 1–9.
[55] Reiter PL, Pennell ML, Katz ML. Acceptability of a COVID-19 vac-
cine among adults in the United States: How many people would get
vaccinated? Vaccine. 2020;38(42):6500–6507.
[56] Perlis R, Lazer D, Ognyanova K, Baum M, Santillana M, Druckman
J, et al. The COVID States Project# 9: Will Americans vaccinate
themselves and their children against COVID-19. 2020;.
[57] Khubchandani J, Sharma S, Price JH, Wiblishauser MJ, Sharma M,
Webb FJ. COVID-19 vaccination hesitancy in the United States: a rapid
national assessment. Journal of community health. 2021;46(2):270–277.
[58] Milligan MA, Hoyt DL, Gold AK, Hiserodt M, Otto MW. COVID-
19 vaccine acceptance: Influential roles of political party and religiosity.
Psychology, Health & Medicine. 2021;p. 1–11.Springer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions 23
[59] Clinton J, Cohen J, Lapinski J, Trussler M. Partisan pandemic: How
partisanship and public health concerns affect individuals’ social mobility
during COVID-19. Science advances. 2021;7(2):eabd7204.
[60] Dryhurst S, Schneider CR, Kerr J, Freeman AL, Recchia G, Van Der Bles
AM, et al. Risk perceptions of COVID-19 around the world. Journal of
Risk Research. 2020;23(7-8):994–1006.
[61] Yıldırım M, G¨ uler A. Factor analysis of the COVID-19 Perceived Risk
Scale: A preliminary study. Death studies. 2022;46(5):1065–1072.
[62] Hill RA, Dunbar RI. Social network size in humans. Human nature.
2003;14(1):53–72.
[63] Green J, Lazer D, Baum M, Druckman J, Uslu A, Simonson MD,
et al. The covid states project# 36: Evaluation of covid-19 vaccine
communication strategies. 2021;.
[64] Joseph K, Horne BD, Green J, Wihbey JP. Local News Online and
COVID in the US: Relationships among Coverage, Cases, Deaths, and
Audience. In: Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web
and Social Media. vol. 16; 2022. p. 441–452.
[65] Kim E, Shepherd ME, Clinton JD. The effect of big-city news on rural
America during the COVID-19 pandemic. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. 2020;117(36):22009–22014.
[66] Uslu A, Lazer D, Perlis RH, Baum M, Quintana A, Ognyanova K, et al.
The COVID States Project# 63: The decision to not get vaccinated, from
the perspective of the unvaccinated. 2021;.
[67] Pierri F, Perry BL, DeVerna MR, Yang KC, Flammini A, Menczer F,
et al. Online misinformation is linked to early COVID-19 vaccination
hesitancy and refusal. Scientific reports. 2022;12(1):5966.
[68] Schulhofer-Wohl S, Garrido M. Do newspapers matter? Short-run and
long-run evidence from the closure of The Cincinnati Post. Journal of
media economics. 2013;26(2):60–81.
[69] Hayes D, Lawless JL. As local news goes, so goes citizen engagement:
Media, knowledge, and participation in US House Elections. The Journal
of Politics. 2015;77(2):447–462.
[70] Gentzkow M, Shapiro JM, Sinkinson M. The effect of newspaper entry and
exit on electoral politics. American Economic Review. 2011;101(7):2980–
3018.Springer Nature 2023 L ATEX template
24 Fear over Friends: Vaccination Decisions
[71] Loftus EF. Planting misinformation in the human mind: A 30-year
investigation of the malleability of memory. Learning & memory.
2005;12(4):361–366.
[72] Lesthaeghe R. The second demographic transition: A concise overview
of its development. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
2014;111(51):18112–18115.
[73] Ruck DJ, Matthews LJ, Kyritsis T, Atkinson QD, Bentley RA. The
cultural foundations of modern democracies. Nature human behaviour.
2020;4(3):265–269.
[74] Turk T, Ewing MT, Newton FJ. Using ambient media to promote
HIV/AIDS protective behaviour change. International Journal of Adver-
tising. 2006;25(3):333–359.
[75] Devlin E, Eadie D, Stead M, Evans K. Comparative study of young
people’s response to anti-smoking messages. International Journal of
Advertising. 2007;26(1):99–128.
[76] Krishen AS, Bui M. Fear advertisements: Influencing consumers to
make better health decisions. International Journal of Advertising.
2015;34(3):533–548.
[77] Harper CA, Satchell LP, Fido D, Latzman RD. Functional fear pre-
dicts public health compliance in the COVID-19 pandemic. International
journal of mental health and addiction. 2021;19:1875–1888.
[78] Altay S, Nera K, Ejaz W, Sch¨ opfer C, Tomas F. Conspiracy Believers
Underuse Social Information (Like Everyone Else). 2022;.