How COVID-19 has Impacted the Anti-Vaccine Discourse:
A Large-Scale Twitter Study Spanning Pre-COVID and Post-COVID Era
Soham Poddar§, Rajdeep Mukherjee*, Subhendu Khatuya*, Niloy Ganguly, Saptarshi Ghosh
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, West Bengal 721302, India.
§sohampoddar@kgpian.iitkgp.ac.in
Abstract
The debate around vaccines has been going on for decades,
but the COVID-19 pandemic showed how crucial it is to un-
derstand and mitigate anti-vaccine sentiments. While the pan-
demic may be over, it is still important to understand how the
pandemic affected the anti-vaccine discourse, and whether
the arguments against non-COVID vaccines (e.g., Flu, MMR,
IPV , HPV vaccines) have also changed due to the pandemic.
This study attempts to answer these questions through a large-
scale study of anti-vaccine posts on Twitter. Almost all prior
works that utilized social media to understand anti-vaccine
opinions considered only the three broad stances of Anti-
Vax, Pro-Vax, and Neutral. There has not been any effort
to identify the specific reasons/concerns behind the anti-vax
sentiments (e.g., side-effects, conspiracy theories, political
reasons) on social media at scale. In this work, we propose
two novel methods for classifying tweets into 11 different
anti-vax concerns – a discriminative approach (entailment-
based) and a generative approach (based on instruction tun-
ing of LLMs) – which outperform several strong baselines.
We then apply this classifier on anti-vaccine tweets posted
over a 5-year period (Jan 2018 - Jan 2023) to understand how
the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the anti-vaccine con-
cerns among the masses. We find that the pandemic has made
the anti-vaccine discourse far more complex than in the pre-
COVID times, and increased the variety of concerns being
voiced. Alarmingly, we find that concerns about COVID vac-
cines are now being projected onto the non-COVID vaccines,
thus making more people hesitant in taking vaccines in the
post-COVID era.
1 Introduction
Vaccines are considered to be a crucial weapon for preven-
tion of several deadly diseases. However, a fierce debate
around vaccines has existed since the past several decades,
with “Pro-Vaxxers” supporting the use of vaccines, and
“Anti-Vaxxers” opposing vaccines. Both these groups ac-
tively share their opinions on vaccines over social media.
With the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Anti-Vaxxer
movement gained momentum, and a lot more people started
sharing their concerns about COVID vaccines during the
*These authors contributed equally.
This work has been accepted at the 18th International AAAI
Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM), 2024.years 2020-21. Though the COVID pandemic has subsided
(WHO declared end to COVID-19 as a global health emer-
gency on 5 May 20231) it is still important to understand
whether the anti-vaccine discourse has changed as a result of
the pandemic. This understanding is particularly important
for several non-COVID vaccines that still needs to be admin-
istered regularly for the well-being of the society. Many such
non-COVID vaccines have been actively opposed since pre-
COVID times, such as the MMR (Measles-Mumps-Rubella)
vaccine, the IPV vaccine, the Flu vaccine, and so on (Kata
2012). It is important to understand whether the anti-vaccine
discourse around these non-COVID vaccines has also been
affected by the pandemic, so that the evolving anti-vaccine
concerns can be countered.
Many prior works have tried to understand the vaccine
discourse through the lens of social media such as Twit-
ter (Gunaratne et al. 2019; M ¨uller et al. 2019; Cotfas et al.
2021; Poddar et al. 2022b). All these prior works have clas-
sified/labeled vaccine-related tweets based on their high-
level stance towards vaccines – Anti-Vax, Pro-Vax or Neu-
tral (neither anti- nor pro-vax). However, there are several
distinct fine-grained concerns that people express towards
vaccines. For instance, some people might be hesitant be-
cause of the potential side-effects of vaccines, some may ar-
gue that the vaccines are not effective enough, while some
may refuse to take vaccines because of political reasons .
Identifying these fine-grained anti-vaccine concerns is cru-
cial to understanding the anti-vaccine discourse. However,
very little work has been done on automating this task of
detecting the specific concerns towards vaccines from tex-
tual posts (details in the ‘Related Works’ section). In fact,
till recently, there was no dataset for developing ML/NLP
models to identify specific anti-vaccine concerns from texts.
Our recent prior work (Poddar et al. 2022a) developed a
dataset called ‘CA VES’ that labels tweets with 11 distinct
anti-vaccine concerns (see Table 1), which has opened up
the possibilities for exploring ML/NLP methods for detec-
tion of specific anti-vaccine concerns. In this work, we uti-
lize this dataset to address the following Research Questions
–(RQ1) How can anti-vax social media posts (tweets) be
accurately classified based on the specific anti-vaccine
concern(s) voiced in them? This multi-class, multi-label
1https://news.un.org/en/story/2023/05/1136367
1arXiv:2404.01669v1  [cs.SI]  2 Apr 2024classification problem is particularly challenging since all
the concerns fall under the broad umbrella of anti-vaccine
content, and the vocabulary used in tweets voicing the differ-
ent concerns is similar and overlapping (as also pointed out
in (Poddar et al. 2022a)). The very skewed distribution of
the classes also adds to the challenge, with the ‘side-effect’
class being present in 38.4%of the tweets while the ‘con-
spiracy’ and ‘ingredients’ classes being present in <5%of
the tweets.
In this work, we propose novel methods for this classifica-
tion problem. To distinguish effectively among the different
classes/labels, we leverage the label semantics , i.e., the de-
scriptions of the labels used by human annotators to label the
tweets (the descriptions are stated in Table 1). Specifically,
we employ two approaches – (i) a discriminative approach
that formulates the classification task as an entailment task,
and (ii) a generative approach based on instruction tuning
of a Large Language Model (LLM) – both utilizing the la-
bel descriptions. Our proposed classifiers outperform several
strong baselines (that did not attempt to use label descrip-
tions) by over 23% in terms of Macro-F1 score.
Subsequently, we use our developed classifier to address
the following research questions (RQs) to gain a detailed
understanding of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on
the anti-vaccine discourse. We ask – (RQ2) Did the anti-
vaccine discourse (over social media) change as a re-
sult of the COVID-19 pandemic? If so, how? After the
pandemic has subsided, has the anti-vaccine discourse re-
turned to its pre-COVID state, or are there still lingering
differences? Furthermore, given the continued importance
of non-COVID vaccines (e.g., MMR, Flu, IPV vaccines) in
the future, we also ask – (RQ3) Has the anti-vaccine dis-
course around non-COVID vaccines also been impacted
by the COVID-19 pandemic? Note that, though there have
been several studies on the social media discourse around
COVID vaccines, to our knowledge, this is the first large-
scale study on how the COVID-19 pandemic affected the
discourse around non-COVID vaccines.
Our study uncovers several changes that have come in
the anti-vaccine discourse since the pandemic. During pre-
COVID times, the anti-vaccine discourse was predictable
and mostly discussed the ‘side-effects’ of the vaccines. But,
since the pandemic, the concerns have become much more
diversified with several other concerns also being discussed
prominently, such as the vaccines are ‘rushed’, ‘ineffective’
and influenced by ‘political’ factors. In the post-COVID pe-
riod, we see the trends slowly moving back towards those
in the pre-COVID times, but there still remain prominent
differences. Importantly, we find that the discourse around
non-COVID vaccines has also been largely affected by the
pandemic. For instance, in the post-COVID times, there is
a lot more discussion on these vaccines being ineffective,
whereas the concerns with these vaccines being manda-
tory has reduced as compared to the pre-COVID times. In
fact, we observe that the anti-vaccine discourse around non-
COVID vaccines has become much more complex since the
pandemic . For many people, COVID has enhanced their
prior concerns about non-COVID vaccines – this is partic-
ularly true for the traditional anti-vaxxers who were hesi-tant about taking vaccines even during pre-COVID times.
Alarmingly, we find that several new concerns that arose
about COVID vaccines are now being projected onto non-
COVID vaccines as well. For instance, the mRNA technol-
ogy that was used in some COVID vaccines is now allegedly
said to be used in Flu vaccines. As a result, we find a set of
Twitter users (whom we call ‘converted anti-vaxxers’) who
supported vaccines in pre-COVID times, but are now un-
willing to take vaccines any further . We study the opinion
changes of these two sets of users to answer the last research
question (RQ4) What are the concerns of traditional and
converted anti-vaxxers after the pandemic?
Contributions: Overall, our contributions in this paper are
as follows:- (1) We propose novel classifiers for labeling a
anti-vax tweet with fine-grained anti-vax concerns, leverag-
ing the label descriptions. Our classifiers outperform sev-
eral strong baselines for this challenging multi-label classi-
fication task. We also show that our classifiers perform well
on tweets related to both COVID vaccines and non-COVID
vaccines. (2) We perform a long-term analysis of the anti-
vaccine discourse, spanning pre-COVID, COVID and post-
COVID times, to analyze how the anti-vax concerns of peo-
ple have changed due to the pandemic. To our knowledge,
this is the first study on how the COVID-19 pandemic af-
fected the discourse around non-COVID vaccines as well.
(3) We identify several important changes in the anti-vaccine
discourse since the pandemic, some of which are lingering
even after the pandemic. Importantly, we uncover new con-
cerns emerging about non-COVID vaccines (such as the Flu
vaccine), which is causing more people to become hesitant
towards these vaccines. The datasets and codes for our work
have been made available to promote further research.2
We believe this work provides an important step in identi-
fying specific anti-vax concerns of netizens from their social
media posts, and presents insights that are crucial in allevi-
ating people’s vaccine concerns in the future.
2 Related Works
In this section, we briefly discuss some related works in
the areas of vaccine-related information on social media and
some classification methods.
Vaccine studies on social media: Since the onset of the
COVID-19 pandemic, social media discussions around vac-
cines have increased rapidly. In fact, at the start of the pan-
demic during 2020, there was a huge surge of anti-vaccine
opinions (Burki 2020; Bonnevie et al. 2020; Durmaz et al.
2022) which started decreasing again as the COVID-19 vac-
cines rolled out in early 2021 (Poddar et al. 2022b). While
prior works have analyzed vaccine sentiments during 2020-
21, the lingering effects in the post-COVID era remain to be
examined (which we do in this paper).
Furthermore, though many prior works have studied peo-
ple’s opinions on COVID vaccines (as stated above), to our
knowledge, there are very few studies that try to understand
how the anti-vaccine discourse around non-COVID vaccines
2https://github.com/sohampoddar26/covid-impact-antivax
2Conspiracy: Deeper Conspiracy – The tweet suggests some
deeper conspiracy, and not just that the Big Pharma want to
make money (e.g., vaccines are being used to track people,
COVID is a hoax).
Country: Country of origin – The tweet is against some vaccine
because of the country where it was developed/manufactured.
Ineffective: Vaccine is ineffective – The tweet expresses con-
cerns that the vaccines are not effective enough and are useless.
Ingredients: Vaccine Ingredients/technology – The tweet ex-
presses concerns about the ingredients present in the vaccines
(eg. fetal cells, chemicals) or the technology used (e.g., mRNA
vaccines can change your DNA).
Mandatory: Against mandatory vaccination – The tweet sug-
gests that vaccines should not be made mandatory.
Pharma: Against Big Pharma – The tweet indicates that the
Big Pharmaceutical companies are just trying to earn money, or
is against such companies in general because of their history.
Political: Political side of vaccines – The tweet expresses con-
cerns that the governments/politicians are pushing their own
agenda though the vaccines.
Religious: The tweet opposes vaccines due to religious reasons.
Rushed: Untested/Rushed Process – The tweet expresses con-
cerns that the vaccines have not been tested properly or that the
published data is not accurate.
Side-effect: Side Effects/Deaths – The tweet expresses con-
cerns about the side effects of the vaccines, including deaths.
Unnecessary: The tweet indicates vaccines are unnecessary, or
that alternate cures are better.
None: No specific reason stated in the tweet, or some reason
other than the given ones.
Table 1: The different classes/labels (concerns or objec-
tions towards vaccines) in the CA VES dataset (Poddar et al.
2022a) along with their descriptions.
has evolved during and after the pandemic. A few very re-
cent works talk about the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
on the traditional non-COVID vaccines, such as MMR, IPV ,
etc. However they only comprise of anectodal evidence (Alt-
man et al. 2023; Knijff et al. 2023) and rudimentary survey-
based analyses (Rivera-Rivera et al. 2023). Our study is the
first to analyse the impact of COVID-19 on opinions towards
the non-COVID vaccines on a large scale over social media.
Classification of vaccine-related social media posts: Most
prior works categorized vaccine-related posts into three
broad classes – Pro-Vax (supports vaccines), Anti-Vax
(against vaccines) and Neutral (M ¨uller et al. 2019; Cotfas
et al. 2021; Poddar et al. 2022b), while a recent work (Mu
et al. 2023) split the anti-vax class into “strongly anti-vax”
and “vax-hesitant”. However, prior works have shown that
there exist several fine-grained anti-vaccine concerns (Fasce
et al. 2023); for instance, some people worry about side-
effects of vaccines, while others are against the politiciza-
tion of vaccines. Thus, simply studying the broad classes
does not give us a complete picture of the different shades
of anti-vaccine content on social media.
A few prior works tried to understand these fine-grained
reasons for vaccine hesitancy, mostly by manual analy-
sis (Bonnevie et al. 2020) and unsupervised topic mod-
elling (Praveen et al. 2021; Poddar et al. 2022b; Hwang et al.Tweet Excerpt Labels
STOP TAKING TOXIC VAX and expose
COVID hoax and murders with morphine and
ventillators. there is No covid !ingredients,
conspiracy,
unnecessary
Please don’t push vaccine on us make it vol-
untary . We don’t trust anything to do with Bill
Gates pushing their agenda of vaccine chips !!pharma,
mandatory,
ingredients
The reason insurance companies won’t pay out
if you experience the inevitable adverse reac-
tions, including death is because it is an “Ex-
perimental Vaccine”side-effect,
rushed
Would you want the Russian vaccine ? If not,
you shouldn’t want one that’s been pushed
through for political reasons either.political,
country
I’m NOT taking your damn vaccine. Keep
your conspiracy out of my veins!none
Table 2: Examples of tweets with their labels and explana-
tions, from the CA VES dataset. The explanations for differ-
ent labels are highlighted in italics .
2022). We recently developed the CA VES dataset (Pod-
dar et al. 2022a) that enables training deep neural mod-
els to accurately identify vaccine concerns from tweets. To
our knowledge, no prior work has tried to apply a super-
vised classifier on social media posts to derive insights about
changes in the anti-vaccine discourse.
Multi-label Classification: Multi-label classification is a
long-studied problem, and several approaches have been
applied in various sub-domains of social media analysis,
such as emotion detection from tweets (Mukherjee et al.
2021; Ameer et al. 2023), disaster mitigation (Chowdhury
et al. 2020) and symptom detection (Jarynowski et al. 2021).
Looking out to general domains, entailment-based meth-
ods (Wang et al. 2021) and generative models (Simig et al.
2022) (which we apply in this work) have been applied to
classification tasks. However, the key novelty in our pro-
posed methods – incorporating label semantics into multi-
label classification, has not been explored earlier in the do-
main of social media analysis.
3 The CA VES Dataset for anti-vax concerns
CA VES (Poddar et al. 2022a) consists of 9,921 anti-vaccine
(anti-vax) tweets that convey hesitancy towards COVID-19
vaccines. Each tweet is labelled with specific concerns that
the user (author of the tweet) expressed against the intake of
COVID-19 vaccines (e.g., ineffectiveness, side effects, etc.).
There are 12 different classes (labels), as detailed in Table 1,
with 11 of them representing specific anti-vax concerns,
while the last one (‘ None ’) signifying that no specific anti-
vaccine concern is mentioned in the tweet. For each label,
there is an explanatory ‘description’ (shown in Table 1) that
was given to the annotators while labeling the tweets during
preparation of the dataset (Poddar et al. 2022a). Given that
multiple anti-vax concerns may be mentioned in a tweet,
about 20% of the tweets in the dataset are associated with
more than one label, whereas the remaining tweets have ex-
actly one label. We have reported a few examples of tweets
3along with their labels in Table 2. For each label associated
with a tweet, the CA VES dataset also contains a separate ex-
planation in the form of a phrase/span appearing in the tweet
text. Table 2 also shows the explanations (italicized parts)
corresponding to each label associated with a tweet.
Train, validation, and test splits: The CA VES dataset
was already split (by iterative stratified sampling) into train
(70%), validation (10%) and test (20%) sets in our prior
work (Poddar et al. 2022a). We consistently use the same
splits to train, validate and test all models in this work.
4 Classifiers for anti-vax concerns
Most existing multi-label classifiers typically treat classes
or labels as mere identifiers without taking into account
any inherent label semantics. We adopted such conventional
models like Roberta, BERT, etc. as our baseline approaches
(detailed later in this section). However, the classes in our
dataset closely relate to each other, as they all fall under the
umbrella of ‘anti-vaccine’ concerns. Consequently, tweets
across different classes share significant semantic similari-
ties, making it difficult for traditional multi-class classifiers
to distinguish between them effectively. For example, train-
ing a generative classifier (with standard greedy decoding)
with only the labels as targets produced poor results, with the
model not being able to accurately distinguish the classes.
We observe that the label descriptions (shown in Table 1)
contain valuable information that can aid in better distinc-
tion among the classes. The annotators also relied on this
information to accurately assign labels while creating the
dataset (Poddar et al. 2022a). This insight motivated us to
incorporate the label descriptions into our classifier design.
We propose two distinct classifiers which leverage the label
descriptions through two different paradigms: (1) a discrimi-
native entailment-based method and (2) a generative method
based on instruction-tuning of LLMs.
Discriminative classifier
This approach, that we call CoV-Ent , converts the classi-
fication problem to that of a sentence-pair Entailment Task
where a BERT-based classifier is trained to predict if the la-
bel descriptions can be inferred/entailed from the tweet text.
Model Description: The model expects two input texts –
apremise , and a hypothesis containing some assumption
based on the premise. The model is trained to predict if the
hypothesis can be entailed (inferred) from the premise or if
itcontradicts the premise. In our case, the tweet text serves
as the premise, and the description of an anti-vax concern
class label (see Table 1) serves as the hypothesis. The in-
put to the model is a concatenation of these, separated by
the[SEP] token. The target is set to either 0(entailment)
or1(contradiction). CoV-Ent consists of a COVID-Twitter-
BERT based encoder (M ¨uller et al. 2020) with a binary clas-
sification head (fully connected linear layer) on top to pre-
dict if the input class description entails or contradicts the
input tweet text.
Training and Testing strategy: Our model CoV-Ent is
trained with both positive as well as negative sampled datapoints. For each tweet text iin the training set, our posi-
tivesamples are formed using the ground truth labels asso-
ciated with text i, with ‘entailment’ as the target. We then
randomly select Nother labels (that are notpart of ground
truth for text i) to form the contrastive/negative samples
with target ‘contradiction’ . We call this number of nega-
tively sampled data points per tweet ‘Negative Sampling
Rate’ (a hyper-parameter). Example inputs and targets for
training the model are illustrated in Table 3 for a given tweet.
During testing, for each tweet in the test set, we use our
trained model to obtain the predictions against each of the
12 possible hypotheses (corresponding to the 12 anti-vax
classes in Table 1). Those classes are predicted to be associ-
ated with the tweet where the model predicts “entailment”
as the output. If the model predicts “ none ” along with other
classes for some input, then we ignore the “ none ” label.
Generative classifier
Our proposed generative framework for the multi-label clas-
sification task, that we call CoV-Gen , is divided into two
stages: supervised generative phase, and an unsupervised
description-to-label matching phase.
Generating label descriptions: In the first stage, we for-
mulate the problem as a generative task using LLMs, where
given a tweet, the task is to accurately generate the descrip-
tions of labels (and not the labels) associated with the tweet.
LetTi= (t1
i, t2
i, t3
i, ..., tn
i)be the ithtweet containing nto-
kens, and let the tweet be labelled with klabels ( c1, c2, ..ck).
For each label ci, we have a pre-defined label description as
given in Table 1. In order to remove hashtags, mentions,
emojis, URLs, etc, we pre-process the tweet using tweet-
preprocessor3and obtain the filtered tweet Tf
i. We prepend
an instruction prompt IPcontaining a natural language de-
scription of the task, to the processed tweet as shown in the
input column of Table 4. The modified input therefore takes
the shape IP||Tf
i, where ||is a text concatenation operation.
To construct our target, we concatenate the label descrip-
tions, separating them with a full stop .
We start with FLAN-T5 (Longpre et al. 2023; Chung et al.
2022) as the base LLM for this step. Our choice is driven by
the fact that FLAN-T5 models are pre-trained using instruc-
tion tuning for a wide range of over 1.8K tasks. This exten-
sive pre-training not only helps the models to align better to
instructions for new downstream tasks, but also significantly
reduces the number of fine-tuning steps required. More-
over, FLAN-T5 models exhibit robust zero-shot and few-
shot performance when compared to their non-instruction-
tuned counterpart, T5 (Raffel et al. 2020). The model is
trained to condition itself on the modified input IP||Tf
i, and
generate the sequence of target descriptions token by token
by means of auto-regressive decoding. Our training objec-
tive in this process is to minimize the cross-entropy loss be-
tween the generated tokens and the true tokens. The fine-
tuning is conducted in a parameter-efficient way using Low-
Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al. 2021). LoRA freezes the
pretrained model weights while introducing trainable rank
3https://pypi.org/project/tweet-preprocessor/
4Premise (Tweet Text) Hypothesis (Class Description) Labels Target
A vaccine that cant
prevent reinfection?
No thanks I trust my
own immunity thats
over 99.5% effective.Vaccine is ineffective – The tweet expresses concerns that the vaccines are not
effective enough and are useless.ineffective entailment
The tweet indicates vaccines are unnecessary, or that alternate cures are better. unnecessary entailment
Against mandatory vaccination – The tweet suggests that vaccines should not
be made mandatory.mandatory contradiction
The tweet opposes vaccines due to religious reasons. religious contradiction
Table 3: Example of inputs and targets to train CoV-Ent. ‘ineffective’ and ‘unnecessary’ are the ground truth labels for the given
tweet, while ‘side-effect’ and ‘mandatory’ are randomly chosen wrong labels for contrastive/negative sampling.
Tweet Text GT Labels Input Target
A vaccine that cant
prevent reinfec-
tion? No thanks I
trust my own im-
munity thats over
99.5% effective.ineffective,
unnecessaryInstruction: First read the task description. There could
be multiple categories for a tweet.
Task: Multi-label Text Classification
Description: Generate label description for the given text.
A vaccine that cant prevent reinfection? No thanks I trust
my own immunity thats over 99.5% effective.Vaccine is ineffective – The tweet ex-
presses concerns that the vaccines are
not effective enough and are useless.
The tweet indicates vaccines are un-
necessary, or that alternate cures are
better.
Table 4: Example of input (prompt and tweet-text) and target (the label descriptions, separated by full-stop) to train CoV-Gen.
decomposition matrices into each layer of the Transformer
architecture. Effectively, it substantially reduces the number
of parameters to be updated during the fine-tuning process,
leading to significant reduction in training cost.
Matching generated descriptions: In the second stage, we
begin by breaking down the generated sequence of label de-
scriptions into individual sentences, separated by full stops
if present. Given that the generated description, correspond-
ing to each such sentence, may not exactly match the ground
truth label descriptions, we rely on a state-of-the-art pre-
trained Sentence-BERT encoder (Reimers et al. 2019) to ar-
rive at the final predicted label descriptions. Specifically, we
utilize this encoder to derive embeddings for each of the gen-
erated descriptions (sentences), denoted as gendecf
i. Simi-
larly, we also extract embeddings for the ground truth de-
scriptions corresponding to all available 12 labels. The label
description that exhibits the highest cosine similarity with
the embedding of gendecf
iis considered to be the final pre-
dicted description. This approach takes into account the pos-
sibility of multiple label descriptions being generated by the
model, and ensures that the most accurate label descriptions
are finally assigned to the input tweet. The corresponding la-
bels can be easily obtained given the existence of a 1:1 corre-
spondence between the labels and their descriptions. Please
refer to Table 5, which presents an example of a tweet, its
generated description, and the final predicted labels.
Experiments and Results
Baselines : We used the same baselines as in Poddar et al.
(2022a). First, we tried some Transformer encoder models
paired with a classification head on top for multi-label classi-
fication – (1) the CT-BERT (M¨uller et al. 2020) model, and
the (2) RoBERTa-Large (Liu et al. 2019) model. Next, we
incorporated the explanations (that are part of the CA VES
dataset) as inputs to a model to see if it improves per-
formance. Such models include a modified version of the
(3)HateXplain (Mathew et al. 2021) model, (4) the ‘Multi-task’model (Poddar et al. 2022a) and the (5) modified Ex-
Pred (Zhang et al. 2021) model which contain a shared CT-
BERT encoder and multiple token and sequence classifica-
tion layers that separately predict the labels and generate the
explanations for each of the classes.
As another baseline, we used (6) GPT-3.5-Turbo (Chat-
GPT) in a zero-shot setting – we provided all class labels
and descriptions as part of the prompt, along with a tweet
text, and asked ChatGPT to predict which classes apply to
the given tweet. We also tried a variation where we included
an example tweet along with each class description, but this
variation performed slightly worse and is thus omitted.
Experimental Setup: For CoV-Ent, we used the COVID-
Twitter-BERT (CT-BERT) (M ¨uller et al. 2020) encoder,
which is a BERT-Large model pre-trained on a large set of
COVID-related tweets. We observe the optimum results on
the validation set for the negative sampling rate, N= 7;
hence this is what we use. For CoV-Gen, we utilized the pre-
trained checkpoints of FLAN-T5-Base from the Hugging-
face Library (Wolf et al. 2020). For training this model with
LoRA (Hu et al. 2021), the rank for the trainable decom-
position matrices was set to 2. FLAN-T5-Base was trained
with LoRA on the training set for only 5 epochs with a batch
size of 8 and learning rate of 5e−4. For all our experiments,
the maximum input length was set to 128 and the maximum
length of output to be generated was set to 50. These hyper-
parameters were selected based on the best Macro-F1 results
on the validation set of the CA VES dataset. All our experi-
ments are performed on a Tesla V100 32GB GPU.
Metrics: We used three standard metrics to evaluate the
models. Given the set of predicted and gold standard la-
bels for a tweet, we calculate the F1-score for each of the
12classes (as described in Table 1) separately and find the
(i) Macro-average F1-score, and (ii) Weighted-average F1-
score with weights proportional to the class frequencies. We
also calculate the (iii) Jaccard similarity between a tweet’s
predicted and gold standard label-sets and average it over all
5Tweet Text Generated Description Matched Label Descriptions Pred labels
A vaccine that cant pre-
vent reinfection? No thanks
I trust my own immunity
thats over 99.5% effective.tweet indicates vaccines are un-
necessary, or that alternate cures
are better. Vaccine is ineffective
– The tweet expresses concernsThe tweet indicates vaccines are unnecessary, or that
alternate cures are better.
Vaccine is ineffective – The tweet expresses con-
cerns that the vaccines are not effective enough and
are useless.unnecessary,
ineffective
Table 5: Example of a text input and the corresponding generated output by CoV-Gen. The generated text ( 2ndcolumn) contains
two descriptions separated by full-stop, which are matched to actual label descriptions leading to the predicted labels.
Model Macro-F1 Weighted-F1 Jaccard
Baselines that do not leverage label descriptions
RoBERTa-Large 0.6626 0.7319 0.6949
CT-BERT 0.6924 0.7419 0.7040
HateXplain 0.6709 0.7245 0.6909
ExPred 0.6558 0.7105 0.6576
Multi-Task 0.6823 0.7371 0.7018
Chat-GPT (0-shot) 0.4447 0.5234 0.4642
Our methods that leverage label descriptions
CoV-Ent 0.7125 0.7527 0.7053
CoV-Gen 0.8525 0.8966 0.8885
Table 6: Performance of different models on the label clas-
sification task of the CA VES dataset. Our proposed model
CoV-Gen performs the best in all metrics.
tweets in the test set. All these standard metrics were calcu-
lated using the Scikit-Learn package (Pedregosa et al. 2011).
Classification results : Table 6 states the performance of all
models over the CA VES test set. Our proposed generative
variant CoV-Gen, consistently demonstrates superior perfor-
mance across all evaluation metrics whereas our discrimina-
tive variant CoV-Ent becomes the second best. Among the
baselines, CT-BERT performs the best.
Our generative classifier CoV-Gen achieves 19.64%
higher macro-F1 score compared to our discriminative vari-
ant, CoV-Ent. CoV-Gen achieves an even more impressive
23.12% increase in performance over the top-performing
baseline model, CT-BERT. The greater increase in Macro-F1
indicates that our model performs better on the niche classes
that are present in smaller numbers in the dataset. Thus,
incorporating class-descriptions into a model improves its
ability to deal with such niche classes.
Error analysis of best classifier : We performed an error
analysis of the examples misclassified by CoV-Gen. For a
majority of the cases, we found the predictions by CoV-Gen
to be partially correct, such as predicting one out of two
gold-standard labels correctly, or predicting a wrong label
along with a correct label. Some examples of such partially
correct predictions are given in Table 7.
5 Data Preparation for Analysis
This section describes how we collect data from Twitter, and
prepare for a long-term analysis of the anti-vax discourse.Tweet Collection
Our goal is to analyse the anti-vaccine discourse (specifi-
cally, anti-vaccine tweets ) ranging from pre-COVID to post-
COVID times. To this end, we first used the Twitter Aca-
demic API4to collect vaccine-related tweets posted dur-
ing the 5-year span between Jan. 2018 and Jan. 2023. We
searched tweets using various keywords highlighted in Pod-
dar et al. (2022a,b); Gunaratne et al. (2019). The keywords
included a combination of generic vaccine-related keywords
(e.g. ‘vaccine’, ‘vaxxer’) and COVID-vaccine specific key-
words (e.g. ‘astra zeneca’, ‘pfizer’, ‘comirnaty’, ‘moderna’).
Also, for analysing the impact of COVID-19 on non-
COVID vaccines, we collected tweets containing mentions
of 4 common and highly-debated vaccines – (i) Flu Vaccine,
(ii) MMR (Measles, Mumps, Rubella) vaccine, (iii) IPV
(Inactivated Polio) vaccine and (iv) HPV (Human Papillo-
mavirus) / Gardasil vaccine. For this, we used the keywords
such as ‘MMR’, ’measles vaccine’, ‘HPV’, ‘gardasil’, etc.
Using all of these keywords, we collected about
95M (million) distinct vaccine-related tweets (excluding
retweets) posted in between January 2018 and January 2023.
Though our data collection strategy does not guarantee
the collection of all the vaccine-related tweets, we believe
that the wide variety of keywords used to collect data en-
sures a fair representation of the overall vaccine discourse
on Twitter. Since we perform analyses on aggregate data
over time-periods of several months (as reported in subse-
quent sections), we believe the insights gained represent the
overall broad picture of the vaccine discourse on Twitter.
Identifying Anti-Vaccine Tweets
In this work, since we are specifically interested in the anti-
vaccine discourse, we used the 3-class vaccine stance classi-
fier developed in our prior work (Poddar et al. 2022b) on all
the tweets we collected, to identify the anti-vaccine tweets.
This 3-class CT-BERT-based classifier gives the probabil-
ity of a vaccine-related tweet being Anti-vax or Pro-vax or
Neutral, and achieves macro-F1 scores in the range [0.780,
0.858] on various datasets (Poddar et al. 2022b). We identi-
fied tweets that were predicted as Anti-Vax by this classifier
with probability ≥0.8– the same threshold as was used
for identifying anti-vax tweets for creation of the CA VES
dataset (Poddar et al. 2022a). This high threshold is chosen
to minimize chances of misclassification. Through this pro-
cess, we were finally left with 19.6M Anti-Vax tweets in
total.
4https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/twitter-api
6Tweet Text Generated Description GT Labels Pred labels
Pfizer is gonna make 15 BILLION in covid vax sales. Idc how
your feeling now. I don’t understand ppl like you saying I’m
fine right now. What if in a year you have cancer or an autoim-
mune illness. Both are possible....Against Big Pharma — The tweet indi-
cates that the Big Pharmaceutical com-
panies are just trying to earn money, or
is against such companies inpharma,
side-effectpharma
Mad fascist dictator Johnson now wants to force you to take an
experimental vaccine with no long-term safety profile. All this
for a virus with 0.3% IFR. 1922 committee must step in NOW
and REMOVE this communist lunatic!UnAgainst mandatory vaccination —
The tweet suggests that vaccines should
not be made mandatory.Untested /
Rushed Process — The tweetmandatory,
unnecessary,
rushedrushed,
mandatory
With the media pushing hard for vaccine passports/id. Boris
has one chance left to prove that he is indeed, conservative. If
he caves in and divides the people further, he will destroy what
is left of his credibility.Against mandatory vaccination — The
tweet suggests that vaccines should not
be made mandatory. Political Political
Political Politicalmandatory mandatory,
political
Table 7: Examples of tweets where CoV-Gen gives partially correct predictions – either wrongly predicts only a subset of the
ground truth (GT) labels or more than the GT labels.
Model Macro-F1 Weighted-F1 Jaccard
CoV-Ent 0.7389 0.7813 0.7125
CoV-Gen 0.8215 0.8216 0.7909
Table 8: Performance of our classifiers on our CaV-N dataset
containing tweets about non-COVID vaccines. All models
are trained on the CA VES training set.
Classification of Pre-COVID / Non-COVID tweets
As stated earlier, our classifiers were trained on the CA VES
dataset which contains only COVID vaccine-related tweets
posted during the pandemic. But we want to apply our clas-
sifier on tweets spanning a long duration including both pre-
COVID and COVID times, as well as on tweets related to
non-COVID vaccines; hence we wanted to check if our clas-
sifier performs well on such tweets too.
To this end, we created a dataset of 500 randomly se-
lected tweets (from among all the anti-vax tweets we col-
lected) containing (i) anti-vax tweets posted during pre-
COVID times, and (ii) anti-vax tweets posted during/after
the COVID-19 pandemic, but about the four different non-
COVID vaccines (as mentioned earlier in this section). We
asked 3 undergraduate students (who are well-versed in En-
glish, frequent Twitter users, and none of whom is an au-
thor of this paper) to annotate the 500 tweets in an exactly
similar way as the CA VES dataset. The class labels and de-
scriptions (Table 1) were informed to them, and they were
asked to “label each tweet with one or more appropriate la-
belsindependently ” (without consulting each other). The la-
bels marked by at least 2 of them were retained while tweets
with no majority labels were discarded, similar to what was
done for the CA VES dataset (Poddar et al. 2022a). Finally,
this dataset (which we call CaV-N ) contains 486 tweets la-
belled into the same 12 labels as in the CA VES dataset.
We applied our classifiers on this new dataset CaV-N.
Note that all these models were trained over the CA VES
training data; we used the CaV-N set only for testing. The
results over CaV-N are given in Table 8. Our models, partic-
ularly CoV-Gen, perform well on this dataset as well, depict-
ing its robustness. Thus we conclude that our classifiers can
effectively be used on any anti-vaccine tweet, both related toCOVID vaccines and non-COVID vaccines.
Time Periods for analysing the anti-vax discourse
We want to analyse people’s anti-vaccine concerns during
different points of time with respect to the COVID-19 pan-
demic. Accordingly, we consider these 4 time periods:
1)Pre-COVID period (Jan 2018 - Jan 2020) : This period
was before the COVID-19 outbreak was declared as a global
health emergency by WHO (on 30 January 2020).
2)COVID-start period (Feb 2020 - Dec 2020) : The time of
the pandemic, but before a vaccine for COVID-19 was made
available to the general public.
3)COVID-vax period (Jan 2021 - Apr 2022) : The period
when newly developed COVID-19 vaccines were being ad-
ministered at large-scale.
4)Post-COVID period (May 2022 - Jan 2023) : This is
the period after COVID-19 cases/deaths started declining (as
per WHO reports5) and vaccination rates stagnated as people
stopped fearing the disease6.
6 Analysis
We now perform various analyses on the anti-vaccine tweets
posted during the four time periods to understand how
COVID-19 affected the anti-vaccine discourse. Note that we
excluded the ‘religious’ and ‘country’ anti-vax classes from
our analyses since they are substantially rarer than the other
classes, having less than 1% tweets each.
RQ2: How has the Anti-Vax discourse changed due
to COVID-19?
To characterize the anti-vax discourse during a certain time-
period, we apply our classifier over all anti-vax tweets
posted during that period, and compute the distribution of
the different concerns (labels given by the classifier). Fig-
ure 1 compares this distribution of anti-vax concerns over
all the four time-periods. Note that, since a tweet can have
more than one concern stated in them, the sum of individual
percentages for a time period may exceed 100%. Also, we
5https://tinyurl.com/who-covid-update-may-2022
6https://tinyurl.com/nyt-covid-vaccine-decline
7conspiracy ineffective ingredients mandatorypharma politicalrushed
unnecessary05101520253035Percentage of tweetspre_covid
covid_start
covid_vax
post_covid
side-effect0102030405060Figure 1: Distribution of concerns in anti-vax tweets across
the different time-periods. The ‘side-effect’ class (the largest
class) is shown separately, to enable better visualization of
the other classes. The inset graph shows the decline of the
ineffective class in post-COVID period.
show the ‘side-effect’ class separately (on the right), since it
is by far the largest class, and including it in the same figure
would make it difficult to visualize the temporal variations
in the other classes (we consistently show the ‘side-effect’
class separately in all subsequent figures).
Dispersion of concerns during the COVID pandemic:
From Figure 1, we see that during pre-COVID times, the two
primary concerns about vaccines were the ‘ side-effect ’ and
‘pharma ’ classes. In the side-effects class, people mainly
talked about Autism among children allegedly from the
MMR vaccine, and the side-effects of the HPV vaccine in
teenagers. The ‘pharma’ class was the other major class
with accusations against the big pharmaceutical companies
of scams. These two classes accounted for almost 75% of
the anti-vaccine concerns.
The focus on ‘side-effects’ and ‘pharma’ declined since
the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic (the COVID-start pe-
riod). Especially, the proportion of tweets discussing ‘side-
effects’ declined rapidly, as people started discussing other
concerns. For instance, many people started arguing that
vaccines for COVID-19 were ‘unnecessary’ (e.g., since
COVID-19 had a low mortality rate) and/or ‘ ineffective ’.
The ‘rushed’ class also gained prominence with netizens
raising concerns regarding COVID vaccines not being tested
well enough. The proportion of tweets posting ‘conspiracy
theories’ and ‘political’ reasons also increased significantly
during the COVID-start period. Thus, the anti-vax discourse
became a lot more dispersed/varied during the COVID times
(as compared to the pre-COVID times), as several different
anti-vax concerns started to be prominently discussed.
Anti-vax discourse during the post-COVID times: Since
May 2022 (the post-COVID period), we see some of the
concern-classes returning towards their pre-COVID propor-
tions; but there still remain some lingering differences from
the pre-COVID times. For the classes ‘ineffective’, ‘manda-
tory’, ‘political’ and ‘unnecessary’, we notice the fractions
of tweets in the post-COVID period decreasing (compared
to their respective fractions during the COVID-vax period),
thus bringing these classes closer to their proportions in the
pre-COVID period. To bring this out more clearly, the inset
graph in Figure 1 shows the ‘ineffective’ class decreasinggradually (fractions shown month-wise since May 2022).
However, there are still some major lingering differences
from the pre-COVID distribution. For instance, a lot more
tweets still express concerns with vaccines being ‘ineffec-
tive’ and ‘mandatory’ than in the pre-COVID times. In con-
trast, the proportion of tweets in the ‘pharma’ class contin-
ues to be a lot lower than in the pre-COVID times. It remains
to be seen whether these differences persist in the future, or
if the anti-vax discourse returns to its pre-COVID state.
RQ3: How has COVID-19 impacted the anti-vax
discourse around non-COVID vaccines?
We now concentrate on uncovering the changes in anti-vax
discourse around non-COVID vaccines due to the pandemic.
This analysis holds practical importance, since, these non-
COVID vaccines are the main vaccines to be administered
regularly even after the pandemic has subsided. Thus the
changes in their discourse, if any, need to be identified.
To this end, we filter anti-vax tweets posted about four
non-COVID vaccines that are heavily debated over the last
several decades – (i) Flu vaccine, (ii) MMR, (iii) IPV and
(iv) HPV vaccine, as discussed in the previous section. Fig-
ure 2 shows the distribution of concerns among all the anti-
vax tweets about these vaccines, across the different time-
periods. Note that the distributions in Figure 2 are different
from those in Figure 1, since Figure 2 considers only those
tweets that mentioned one of the above four non-COVID
vaccines, while Figure 1 included all anti-vaccine tweets.
Changes in the distribution of concerns: For some of
the concern-classes, e.g. ‘conspiracy’ and ‘political’, we
observe very low variations in the discourse around non-
COVID vaccines (Figure 2), unlike what was observed for
the overall distributions in Figure 1. These concerns about
the non-COVID vaccines seem to be mostly unaffected by
the pandemic. However, the other concern-classes have been
affected. For the ‘side-effect’ and ‘ingredients’ classes, we
observe a slight dip in the percentages since the start of the
pandemic, which reduced further during the COVID-vax pe-
riod. In contrast, for the ‘ineffective’, ‘rushed’ and ‘unneces-
sary’ classes, the fraction of tweets rose during the COVID
times, and then slightly more during the COVID-vax period,
but have gone down during the post-COVID period.
If we compare the pre-COVID discourse and the post-
COVID discourse about non-COVID vaccines, we find an
increase in the ‘ineffective’, ‘rushed’ and ‘unnecessary’
classes. In particular, there has been a huge rise in the ‘in-
effective’ concern-class. On the other hand, the ‘mandatory’
concern has lessened during the post-COVID period (which
is in contrast to what was observed for the overall distribu-
tion). This is mostly due to people talking less against man-
dating of the HPV vaccine, in the post-COVID times. Thus,
some of the concerns around non-COVID vaccines have in-
deed been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Till now, we have only analysed the temporal variations in
the relative fractions of the concern-classes (Figure 2). Fur-
thermore, manual observation of the tweets reveals several
interesting trends in the sub-topics being discussed about the
non-COVID vaccines at different time-periods . We now de-
8conspiracy ineffective ingredients mandatorypharma politicalrushed
unnecessary05101520253035Percentage of tweetspre_covid
covid_start
covid_vax
post_covid
side-effect0102030405060Figure 2: Distribution of concerns among anti-vax tweets
about non-covid vaccines across the different time-periods.
So we know the flu vaccine causes other respiratory issues in
kids. Now is the covid vaccine doing the same thing with kids
and #RSV?
Flu vaccine started in 1938; 80 years of Flu vaccine develop-
ment and today it’s only 45%-60% effective. Covid19 vaccine
was developed in 8 months and we’re told it’s 95% effective !
Gates’ vaccine found to cause Polio... so by all means let him
vaccine the world for COVID??
So #covid19 drug probably mandatory despite taking 12
months, not the usual 12 years. The last Mandatory one (MMR)
saw a friends 2 healthy sons become very Autistic
Table 9: Examples of tweets (excerpts) posted during
COVID-start/COVID-vax periods, where existing concerns
about non-COVID vaccines were projected to COVID vac-
cines. Such tweets often have a sarcastic tone.
scribe these trends.
Trends during COVID-start/COVID-vax times: We no-
ticed that in many tweets posted during the COVID-
start/COVID-vax periods, several existing concerns about
the non-COVID vaccines were projected towards the COVID
vaccines . Some examples of such tweets (often sarcastic)
are given in Table 9. For instance, we see concerns about
the side-effects of Flu vaccine (respiratory issues) and the
ineffectivenss of Flu vaccine being projected onto COVID
vaccines (e.g., in the 1stand2ndtweets in Table 9 respec-
tively). Several Twitter users were also seen associating the
role of Bill Gates in disseminating Polio Vaccines (IPV)
with his role in developing COVID vaccines (e.g., 3rdtweet
in Table 9). Again, people expressed concerns that, similar
to some non-COVID vaccines in the past, the developmen-
t/testing of COVID vaccines were being too rushed. These
observations partially explain some of the trends in Figure 2,
such as the steep rise in the ‘ineffective’ and ‘rushed’ con-
cerns during the COVID-start and COVID-vax periods.
Trends during post-COVID times: We observe that the
discourse around non-COVID vaccines has become very
varied and complicated in the post-COVID era. In the post-
COVID period, we observe two subsets of tweets mention-
ing the non-COVID vaccines – (i) about 25% of the tweets
mention both non-COVID and COVID vaccines , and (ii) the
rest 75% tweets mentioning only non-COVID vaccines, and
notCOVID vaccines. The distributions of anti-vax concerns
in these two types of tweets are shown in Figure 3.
conspiracy ineffective ingredients mandatorypharma politicalrushed
unnecessaryside-effect01020304050Percentage of tweetsBoth covid and non-covid vaccines
Only non-covid vaccinesFigure 3: Distribution of concerns in tweets from post-
COVID, (i) that mention both COVID and non-COVID vac-
cines, and (ii) that mention only non-COVID vaccines.
Type-I (23%): Concerns about COVID vaccines, but not
about non-COVID vaccines
Inventor of polio vaccine offered it to the world for free, no
profit for himself. Pfizer and others offer the Covide vaccine at
a cost to humanity. That’s the greedy corporation for you. Even
the vaccine is not fully effective.
If you’ve been vaccinated for Chicken Pox, Polio, Small Pox
you actually didn’t get these diseases. How about COVID ...
haven’t you or anyone you know got COVID after getting the
vaccine? So maybe it’s not really a vaccine.
Type-II (70%): Covid has enhanced prior concerns about
non-COVID vaccines
Now that the world knows that Covid19 vaccinations were cre-
ated to kill and mame the masses, will we now speak about how
the MMR Vaccine was created to cause Autism?
Flu vaccines don’t work for the same reason Covid injections
don’t work – The Expose
Type-III (7%): New concerns that arose regarding COVID
vaccines getting projected onto non-COVID vaccines
The same experimental mRNA technology that is in the
Covid19 jabs and boosters will also be in future Flu shots. The
best bet is to say NO to all vaxxines
The Dangers of Adapting COVID19 Antigens into Childhood
Vaccines – Dr. Andrew Wakefield: “It is going to be a disaster”
I’m an RN, and I too will never get another flu shot. I’ve had 2
flu shots in my life. No more. And no covid vaccine for me
I will not be getting a flu shot 4 the first time in many years.
Never a covid booster! Not getting a pneumonia shot either.
But I’ve lost all confidence in CDC protocols. They can’t be
trusted
Table 10: Examples of anti-vax tweets (excerpts) from the
post-COVID period, where both COVID-vaccines and Non-
COVID vaccines have been mentioned. We see three distinct
types of tweets (detailed in the text).
The tweets that mention only non-COVID vaccines (and
do not mention COVID vaccines) show high similarity with
the pre-COVID tweets (when only non-COVID vaccines
were discussed). The KL-divergence of the distribution of
concerns in these tweets with respect to that in the pre-
COVID tweets is low ( 3.29), as also evident by comparing
the red bars in Figure 3 with the pre-covid distribution in
Figure 2. A manual observation of 100 randomly-sampled
tweets that mention only non-COVID vaccines, also shows
them to be very similar to the anti-vax tweets posted during
9pre-COVID times. However, the other set of tweets that con-
tain mentions about both non-COVID and COVID vaccines
are very different. Their distribution of concerns shows high
differences from the pre-covid distribution (KL-divergence
of38.71). Hence it becomes more interesting to study these
tweets since they contain lingering effects of the COVID-19
pandemic over the discourse arond non-COVID vaccines.
A manual observation of 200 tweets that were posted dur-
ing post-COVID and mention both COVID and non-COVID
vaccines, shows 3 broad types of tweets (examples of each
type in Table 10). First, in about 23% of the tweets, the users
say that though they were concerned about COVID vaccines,
they do nothave those concerns about non-COVID vaccines
(Type-I, in the top part of Table 10). Second, in about 70%
of the tweets, we see users who were unwilling to take any
vaccine from pre-COVID times, and now their prior con-
cerns about non-COVID vaccines have been enhanced in the
post-COVID era (Type-II). Some examples of such tweets
have been given in the middle part of Table 10. Third, in the
post-COVID era, we find signs of the opposite effect that
we observed in the COVID-start/COVID-vax phases – about
7% of the tweets reflect that new concerns that arose about
COVID vaccines are being projected onto the non-COVID
vaccines (Type-III). Some such examples are depicted in the
bottom part of Table 10. One major talking point was about
a new flu vaccine being developed with the controversial
mRNA technology that the Pfizer and Moderna COVID vac-
cines were based on. Other examples include people being
sceptical to take vaccines, unwilling to trust pharmaceutical
companies after COVID-19.
Emergence of a new set of anti-vax users : Note that,
within Type-III, we observed some users who earlier readily
took the non-COVID vaccines (during pre-COVID times),
but are now sceptical of these vaccines after the pandemic
(e.g., see the last two tweets in Table 10). Thus, it seems that,
in addition to the traditional anti-vaxxers who consistently
post anti-vax sentiments both before and after the pandemic,
a new set of users has emerged, who supported vaccines be-
fore the pandemic, but are unwilling to take vaccines now;
we call this new set of users as the converted anti-vaxxers .
We study these users in detail in the next section.
RQ4: What are the concerns of Traditional and
Converted Anti-Vaxxers after the pandemic?
A set of people used to post anti-vax opinions on Twitter
since a long time (Kata 2012), though this constituted only a
small fraction of Twitter users. Many of these users continue
to post anti-vax tweets during and after COVID times. We
call this group of users as the “Traditional Anti-Vaxxers” .
After the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, some users who
were originally pro-vaxxers, also started showing hesitancy
towards taking vaccines (as was observed in (Poddar et al.
2022b)). In the previous section, we also observed a set of
people who took vaccines before COVID, but are unwilling
to do so now (e.g. the users who posted the last two tweets in
Table 10); we call this group of people the “Converted Anti-
Vaxxers” . This observation motivated us to study these two
groups of users, to understand their anti-vaccine concerns.
conspiracy ineffective ingredients mandatorypharma politicalrushed
unnecessary05101520253035Percentage of tweetsTraditional Anti-Vaxxers, Pre-COVID
Traditional Anti-Vaxxers, Post-COVID
Converted Anti-Vaxxers, Post-COVID
side-effect010203040506070(a) All vaccine tweets
conspiracy ineffective ingredients mandatorypharma politicalrushed
unnecessary05101520253035Percentage of tweetsTraditional Anti-Vaxxers, Pre-COVID
Traditional Anti-Vaxxers, Post-COVID
Converted Anti-Vaxxers, Post-COVID
side-effect010203040506070
(b) Non-COVID vaccine tweets
Figure 4: Distribution of anti-vaccine concerns posted by the
traditional anti-vaxxers during pre- and post-COVID periods
(red and blue bars), and the converted anti-vaxxers during
post-COVID (yellow bars).
Identifying Traditional and Converted Anti-vaxxers: To
label a user as an Anti-Vaxxer (respectively, Pro-Vaxxer)
during a particular time-period, we use the same method as
suggested by Poddar et al. (2022b) – we check if a user has
posted at least 3vaccine-related tweets during that period,
with≥70% anti-vax (respectively, pro-vax) tweets among
them.7Following this criterion, we got 13,776 anti-vaxxers
and 52,403 pro-vaxxers during the pre-COVID times. Out
of these anti-vaxxers, 1,388 are found to satisfy the same
criterion during post-COVID times as well, i.e., they regu-
larly posted anti-vax tweets both before and after the pan-
demic. We identify this set as the traditional anti-vaxxers .
We also find 271 pre-COVID pro-vaxxers who posted at least
3 vaccine-related tweets with ≥70% anti-vax tweets dur-
ing post-COVID; we identify this set as the converted anti-
vaxxers . We also manually examined 50 randomly selected
users from the two groups to check if they are automated
bots; none of them seemed to be bots.
Change in concerns of Traditional Anti-Vaxxers: Fig-
ure 4(a and b) compares the distribution of concerns of the
traditional anti-vaxxers during pre-COVID and post-COVID
times. If we look at the overall distribution considering all
vaccine-related tweets (the red and blue bars in Figure 4a),
the traditional anti-vaxxers talk more about the ‘conspiracy’,
‘ineffective’ and ‘unnecessary’ classes during post-COVID,
compared to the pre-COVID times. In contrast, the ‘manda-
tory’ and ‘side-effect’ classes seem to have dipped slightly,
while the ‘ingredients’ and ‘pharma’ classes have dropped a
7Note that we are using a relatively strict criterion, to minimize
the chances of misclassifying the vaccine-stance of users.
10lot in the post-COVID times, compared to the pre-COVID
times. If we look at the distribution in those tweets that
mention non-COVID vaccines (the red and blue bars in Fig-
ure 4b), we observe that the post-COVID trends have mostly
reverted to those in pre-COVID for most classes. However,
there is a notable drop in the ‘mandatory’ class, and slight
drop in the ‘pharma’ and ‘ingredients’ classes.
A manual study of 100 randomly selected tweets from this
group of users shows almost all of them to be of Type-II
described in the previous subsection (Table 10), where they
continue to reject all vaccines and discuss how COVID has
enhanced their prior concerns about the vaccines.
Change in concerns of Converted Anti-Vaxxers: We show
the distribution of the concerns of the converted anti-vaxxers
during post-COVID in Figure 4(a and b), and we compare
it with that of the traditional anti-vaxxers during the same
period (i.e., comparing the blue and yellow bars in Fig-
ure 4). We observe that the converted anti-vaxxers talk a lot
more about the ineffectiveness of both the COVID and non-
COVID vaccines (compared to the traditional anti-vaxxers).
The ‘rushed’ and ‘unnecessary’ classes are also discussed
more by the converted anti-vaxxers, than the traditional anti-
vaxxers. On the contrary, the ‘side-effect’ class is less com-
monly discussed by the converted anti-vaxxers.
A manual analysis of 100 randomly selected tweets from
this group of users reveals the following trends. The con-
verted anti-vaxxers mostly post about the COVID vaccines,
which seem to be their primary concern even in post-COVID
times. When they post about the non-COVID vaccines, some
of them speak about how COVID vaccines are less effec-
tive in comparison to non-COVID vaccines (type I tweets
in Table 10). Others in this group post about the con-
cerns about COVID vaccines being projected onto the non-
COVID vaccines (type III in Table 10). They frequently ex-
press concerns about the mRNA technology being used in
non-COVID vaccines (primarily the Flu vaccine) in post-
COVID times. Also they post against the pharmaceutical
companies and the political influence over vaccines. These
concerns are making them unwilling to take the non-COVID
vaccines, particularly the Flu vaccine, in post-COVID times.
7 Conclusion
In this work, we propose two novel classifiers that incorpo-
rate label descriptions to accurately identify the specific anti-
vaccine concerns expressed in tweets. Then we apply the
best classifier on anti-vaccine tweets posted between 2018
and 2023 to derive insights on how the vaccine discourse has
been affected due to the pandemic. We find that the concerns
have become much more varied and complex since the on-
set of the pandemic. Alarmingly, many users have associated
the concerns about COVID vaccines (e.g., use of mRNA)
onto the non-COVID vaccines, and are thus hesitant to take
vaccines such as the Flu vaccine in the post-COVID period.
Implications and broader impact: Our work provides
tools to authorities to understand the specific concerns that
people have towards vaccines. Our proposed classifier (CoV-
Gen) is a key contribution that can be used by authorities toautomatically gain insights on the specific anti-vax concerns
of a person or a group of persons. Using this, authorities can
take the following actions –
(i) Personalise counter-arguments: We have seen that the
vaccine concerns have become a lot more varied since
the pandemic and generic counter-arguments may not be
enough to reduce an individuals’ vaccine-related concerns.
For example, someone concerned about the side-effects
needs a different counter-argument to someone who does
not trust big pharma. Our approach will help authorities ap-
ply targeted/personalised counter-arguments depending on
the specific concerns one has about vaccines.
(ii) Mitigate concerns towards non-COVID vaccines: We
see that many people are associating their concerns about
COVID vaccines with the non-COVID vaccines too, e.g.,
talking about the ineffectiveness of the Flu vaccines, side-
effects of MMR and HPV , and so on. Many people are also
outraged over the mRNA technology allegedly being incor-
porated in non-COVID vaccines. Identifying such specific
concerns about different vaccines can help authorities ad-
dress individual concerns in a systematic way.
(iii) Prevent conversion of users to anti-vaxxers: We ob-
served that there are users who supported vaccines earlier
(pre-COVID times) but are turning against them in post-
COVID times (whom we studied as the ‘converted anti-
vaxxers). Identifying these users and sensitizing them about
the benefits of vaccines over their specific concerns can help
restore their faith in vaccines.
Limitations of our work : One of the limitations is that
much of the vaccine-related data was scraped retrospec-
tively, and many tweets (especially anti-vax tweets) could
have been deleted. Also, our dataset depends on the list of
keywords we used, and could have missed some tweets.
However, given the large set of our collected data and the
large and varied set of keywords we used, we hope that the
high-level insights drawn in this study have not been affected
too much, even if some tweets were missed.
Another limitation is that our data analysis depends on
the classification of our classifiers, which can result in mis-
classification errors. However, note that we have taken strict
thresholds (e.g. 0.8for identifying a tweet as anti-vax) to
minimize the possibility of these errors.
Ethical considerations: We have tried our best not to raise
privacy concerns for the users whose Twitter posts we ana-
lyzed. We report all results over tweets aggregated over sev-
eral months (and from several users for RQ4). The released
data also has the usernames obfuscated. It should be noted
that different people can have varying degrees of concerns
towards vaccines, and though they may not be traditional
anti-vaxxers, they may still be hesitant towards vaccines in
some particular aspects. In this work we use the term ‘Anti-
vaxxers’ for all such users, just to follow the common termi-
nology as prior works. Additionally, while labelling a user
as Anti-Vax (for RQ4), we follow very strict criteria – we
consider a tweet as anti-vax only if the classifier predicts
the label with probability ≥0.8, and we consider a user
as anti-vax only if he/she posted >70% anti-vax (and at
least 3) tweets during a time period (as also done in prior
11works (Poddar et al. 2022b)). Though this is not a foolproof
method, we believe that outliers will not affect the insights
much, given that we derive insights from data aggregated
over several months and from several users.
Future work: There are several directions of future work.
First, the classification performance of the models may be
improved by using ensemble of various classifiers, or by
using custom decoding strategies for the generative model.
We also observed that the anti-vaccine discourse has become
quite complex; for instance, nowadays there are many tweets
that talk in support of the traditional vaccines but are against
COVID vaccines. Thus, traditional sentiment analysis tools
may not be sufficient for such tweets. Rather, application
of Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis (ABSA) methods to
such tweets can be an interesting future work. Another fu-
ture work could be to build automated methods for effec-
tively countering anti-vaccine sentiments using personalised
approaches.
Finally, we understand that getting large-scale data from
the Twitter/X API has gotten very difficult and expensive,
since early-2023. Nevertheless, we believe this work lays the
groundwork for future analysis of vaccine-related concerns
from other types of text as well. Our classifiers and analysis
process can easily be modified to run on short-message texts
from other social media websites. The classifiers can also be
made to run on longer posts from websites like Reddit by
using models like Longformer and Long-T5.
Acknowledgements: We thank the anonymous reviewers
for their comments which helped to improve the paper. We
also acknowledge the students who annotated the tweets
for this study. The first author (S. Poddar) is supported by
the Prime Minister’s Research Fellowship (PMRF) from the
Ministry of Education, Government of India.
References
Altman, J. D.; et al. 2023. Factors affecting vaccine attitudes influ-
enced by the COVID-19 pandemic. Vaccines .
Ameer, I.; et al. 2023. Multi-label emotion classification in texts
using transfer learning. Expert Systems with Applications .
Bonnevie, E.; et al. 2020. Quantifying the rise of vaccine opposi-
tion on Twitter during the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Com-
munication in Healthcare .
Burki, T. 2020. The online anti-vaccine movement in the age of
COVID-19. The Lancet Digital Health .
Chowdhury, J. R.; et al. 2020. Cross-lingual disaster-related multi-
label tweet classification with manifold mixup. In Proc. ACL: Stu-
dent Research Workshop .
Chung, H. W.; et al. 2022. Scaling instruction-finetuned language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416 .
Cotfas, L.-A.; et al. 2021. The Longest Month: Analyzing COVID-
19 Vaccination Opinions Dynamics From Tweets in the Month Fol-
lowing the First Vaccine Announcement. IEEE Access .
Durmaz, N.; et al. 2022. The dramatic increase in anti-vaccine dis-
courses during the COVID-19 pandemic: a social network analysis
of Twitter. Human vaccines & immunotherapeutics .
Fasce, A.; et al. 2023. A taxonomy of anti-vaccination arguments
from a systematic literature review and text modelling. Nature Hu-
man Behaviour .Gunaratne, K.; et al. 2019. Temporal trends in anti-vaccine dis-
course on Twitter. Vaccine .
Hu, E. J.; et al. 2021. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 .
Hwang, J.; et al. 2022. Vaccine discourse during the onset of
the COVID-19 pandemic: Topical structure and source patterns in-
forming efforts to combat vaccine hesitancy. Plos one .
Jarynowski, A.; et al. 2021. Mild adverse events of Sputnik V vac-
cine in Russia: social media content analysis of telegram via deep
learning. Journal of Medical Internet Research .
Kata, A. 2012. Anti-vaccine activists, Web 2.0, and the postmodern
paradigm–An overview of tactics and tropes used online by the
anti-vaccination movement. Vaccine .
Knijff, M.; et al. 2023. Parental intention, attitudes, beliefs, trust
and deliberation towards childhood vaccination in the Netherlands
in 2022: Indications of change compared to 2013. medRxiv .
Liu, Y .; et al. 2019. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 .
Longpre, S.; et al. 2023. The Flan Collection: Designing Data and
Methods for Effective Instruction Tuning. arXiv:2301.13688.
Mathew, B.; et al. 2021. Hatexplain: A benchmark dataset for ex-
plainable hate speech detection. In Proc. AAAI .
Mu, Y .; et al. 2023. VaxxHesitancy: A Dataset for Studying
Hesitancy Towards COVID-19 Vaccination on Twitter. In Proc.
ICWSM .
Mukherjee, R.; et al. 2021. Understanding the role of affect dimen-
sions in detecting emotions from tweets: A multi-task approach. In
Proc. SIGIR .
M¨uller, M.; et al. 2020. Covid-twitter-bert: A natural language
processing model to analyse covid-19 content on twitter. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.07503 .
M¨uller, M. M.; et al. 2019. Crowdbreaks: tracking health trends
using public social media data and crowdsourcing. Frontiers in
public health .
Pedregosa, F.; et al. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in
Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research .
Poddar, S.; et al. 2022a. CA VES: A dataset to facilitate Explainable
Classification and Summarization of Concerns towards COVID
Vaccines. In Proc. SIGIR .
Poddar, S.; et al. 2022b. Winds of Change: Impact of COVID-19
on Vaccine-related Opinions of Twitter users. In Proc. ICWSM .
Praveen, S.; et al. 2021. Analyzing the attitude of Indian citizens
towards COVID-19 vaccine-A text analytics study. Diabetes &
Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews .
Raffel, C.; et al. 2020. Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning
with a Unified Text-to-Text Transformer. JMLR .
Reimers, N.; et al. 2019. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings us-
ing siamese bert-networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084 .
Rivera-Rivera, J. N.; et al. 2023. Attitudes towards HPV and
COVID school-entry policies among adults living in Puerto Rico.
Human Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics .
Simig, D.; et al. 2022. Open vocabulary extreme classification us-
ing generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.05812 .
Wang, S.; Fang, H.; Khabsa, M.; Mao, H.; and Ma, H. 2021. En-
tailment as few-shot learner. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.14690 .
Wolf, T.; et al. 2020. Transformers: State-of-the-Art Natural Lan-
guage Processing. In Proc. EMNLP: System Demos .
Zhang, Z.; et al. 2021. Explain and predict, and then predict again.
InProc. WSDM .
12