arXiv:2404.02451v1  [cs.CY]  3 Apr 2024The SocietalImplicationsofBlockchain Proliferation
CoryCherven
Canisius College
Department ofComputerScience
chervenc@canisius.edu
ABSTRACT
Blockchainanditsdistributedledgertechnologyhavefar- reaching
implicationsforconsumersacrosstheworld.Cryptocurren cieslike
XRPworktosolvekeyissuesintheremittanceindustry,targ eting
corridors like Mexico where foreign remittance fuels econo mies.
Blockchain’s libertarian principles have the potential to change
livesinthethirdworld,replacingcorruptinfrastructure withtrust-
basedsolutions.Whilethistechnologycanbeusedtosigniﬁ cantly
improvelives,ithasawealthofdestructiveapplications. Bitcoin’s
blockchain and nefarious websites like the Silk Road have fu eled
an underground market of drugs, money laundering, and terro r-
ism, complicating digital currency legislation. The negat ive envi-
ronmental eﬀects of cryptocurrency may also contribute sig niﬁ-
cantly to global climate change. Negatives aside, cryptocu rrency
still proves to be a valuable commodity in technological dev elop-
ment.
ACMReference format:
CoryCherven.2024.TheSocietal Implications ofBlockchain Prolif eration.
InProceedings ofThe 150th Anniversary ofCanisius College,
,March 2020, Buﬀalo,NY(CC ’20), 6pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
INTRODUCTION
The development of blockchain technology has created a new
framework for doing immense societal good. A great beneﬁt of
blockchain is its eﬀects of the remittance industry. Billio ns of dol-
larsﬂowwithinandbetweencountrieseveryyear,currently within
a system designed and maintained by the Society of Worldwide
Interbank Financial Telecommunication(SWIFT). This anti quated
system acts as a tracking system for money as it ﬂows through
member banks (like post oﬃces) but relies heavily on its memb er
banks’ infrastructures. As a result, it has proven to be imme nsely
slowandtransactionsaccumulatefeesanddelayateachstep .Blockchain
technology enables funds to be sent in real time with little d elay,
few fees,andwithoutrelying uponthirdpartiestofacilita tetrans-
fers. Cryptocurrencies like XRP [2] are working to solve the an-
tiquation of SWIFT’s network by leveraging localcryptocur rency
markets to instantaneously convert currency from the initi al ﬁat,
transfer it,and convert ittothedestination ﬁat[13].
These beneﬁts of blockchain can also be felt in the third worl d
where citizens lack trust in their governments and their ban king
systems. There are many intuitive applications for blockch ain to
aid these peoplesuch as: using micro-transactions to sell b ack so-
larenergytothegridandreducecosts[1],storingmoneyind ecen-
tralizedwallets outsideof thegovernment’s control [14], and as a
meanstostoreimportantandimmutableidentiﬁcationrecor dslike
IDs,medicalrecords,etc.[1].Blockchain,particularlyi tsdecentral-
ized nature, can protect resources and information outside of thecontrolofanysinglegovernment, allowingthird-worldcit izensto
conﬁdentlyprotectthemselves.
Unfortunately,blockchain’slackofcentralitybringswit hitmany
detrimentaleﬀectsonsocietyaswell.Bitcoin[9]hasprove n tobe
a useful resource in online illicit marketplaces like the Si lk Road
which sell drugs, weapons, and many other nefarious goods an d
services[7].Bydetachingidentitiesandlocalitiesfromd igitalbank
accounts,cryptocurrenciesonblockchainscanevade money laun-
deringregulationandgovernmentoversight[12][3].These curren-
ciescanbefunneledtofundterrorismabroadwhileprotecti ngthe
identities ofdonorsandterroristregimes [4].Additional ly,theim-
mense electrical consumption of computers running blockch ain
software (particularly with proof-of-work blockchains, s ee glos-
sary)contributestorapidclimatechangeandenvironmenta ldegra-
dation[8].
Thankfully, many of the negatives of blockchain are counter -
actedbywidespreadgovernmentregulation.Bytracingbloc kchain
transactions at their entry points (currency exchanges), g overn-
mentsliketheUnitedStatescanfollowtheblockchain’sser ialized
records to see where the money moves. By tagging identities t o
these exchange accounts, governments can eﬀectively trace laun-
dering and illicit transactions (including terrorism) [11 ][6].While
theseregulationsoftenunderminetheoriginalgoalofBitc oin(and
many other cryptocurrencies) to be anonymous, they still en able
blockchain technology’s use for good in remittance and in ai ding
theunbanked.Thisregulationhelpstoensurethatblockcha intech-
nologydoesmoregoodandsocietythanharmandfacilitatesc om-
mercial and communal growth.
BACKGROUND
OnJanuary3,2009,apeer-to-peer(P2P)paymentsystemknow n
asBitcoinwentlive[10].Itsinventor,pseudonymouslytit led“Satoshi
Nakamoto,”createdtheprotocoltoallowforP2Ptransfersw ithout
theneedforatrustedthird party(likeabanking institutio n) inin-
stigatingapaymentbetweentwoparties.Nakamoto[9]envis ioned
acompletelysecureandanonymousmeanstotransfermoneyth at
reliedoncomputingpowertoverifyatransaction’slegitim acy.The
resultingtoken,Bitcoin,producedanupheavalinthewayth atdata
couldmove and be veriﬁed. Other digital currencies followe d suit
includingLitecoin,Ripple,Dash,Dogecoin,andPeercoin[ 6]which
oftenreappliedSatoshi’s vision withtweaks, always utili zingsim-
ilartechnology.Withtheriseofthedigitalcurrency andBi tcoin’s
climb to legitimacy in 2013 [10], it became evident what posi tive
and negative impacts the new technology would bring and that
legislationwas necessary.
There are many negatives that arise from an anonymous P2P
network.Anonymityhasspurredthegrowthofthe“eBayofill icit
drugs” [7], allowed for money laundering [12], funded terro rism
[10],andbegunwarmingtheearth[8].Thankfully,thetrace abilityCC’20,March 2020,Buﬀalo, NY,
Cory Cherven
of blockchain and regulation of exchanges has helped counte ract
this anonymity and curbedcrime.
Regulators of Bitcoin have avoided completely banning cryp -
tocurrencies in most countries as they identify cryptocurr ency’s
beneﬁts. Cryptocurrencies like Ripple (XRP) [2] are workin g to
overhaul legacy systems and reduce remittance fees to impov er-
ished economies. Startups like BitPesa [10] are looking to r educe
transaction fees and aid the unbanked in Africa. There remai ns
anuntappedpotentialtoembedpersonalrecords(health,ba nking,
identity) into blockchaintorevolutionize banking, votin g, andim-
migration issues thatoccurunderunreliable governments [ 1].
GLOSSARY
Node–a computer hosting an instance of the Bitcoin protocol,re-
sponsible for verifying transactions. Anybody can host a no deon
thedecentralizedBitcoinnetwork.
Block–a chunk of data containing an assortment of information,
particularly some or all the transactions since the last blo ck was
accepted bythenetwork’s nodes.
Diﬃculty –how diﬃcult it is to mine a block. This increases and
decreases to ensure that a block is veriﬁed about every ten mi n-
utes.
Mining–the process by which the network veriﬁes the transac-
tions of a given block. All the computers (CPUs) on the networ k
attempttoproduceanSHA-256hashoftheblockwithasuﬃcien t
number of zeros at the beginning (this is determined by the di f-
ﬁculty) by iterating a nonce variable in the block and rehash ing
until it has enough zeros. By solving this hash, the winning C PU
veriﬁes the transactions on the block and sends the block to t he
other nodestobeaccepted.
ProofofWork(PoW) –theprocessofcreatingthehashwhenmin-
ing,provesthattheworkhasbeendonetoverifytheblock,re sults
in thereceiptof thereward.
Reward (incentive) –eachblockminedhas aspecialﬁrsttransac-
tion where the miner (or group of miners) is awarded a speciﬁc
number of Bitcoins. This value halves aboutevery four years and
is currently 12.5 Bitcoins (February 2020) (this keeps the s upply
cappedat21,000,000BTC).
Consensus –theprocessbywhich thenetworkagrees onitsstate.
Afterablockismined,thenetworkmustverifythatnocoinsh ave
been double-spent and append that block to the blockchain. T he
networkallowsforseveralchainstoformbuttheonlyhonest chain
(the one considered valid) is the longest one. Any errant cha ins
causedbyattackerswilldieoﬀwhenconsequentblockscanno tbe
addedtoit and it becomestooshort.
Public/Private Keys –a Bitcoin owner can identify their Bitcoin
"wallet"byapublickey(usedforexchanging thecoins)whic hcan
beseenbyanybody.Theyproveownershipofthosecoinsbyapr i-
vate key in order to initiate a transaction. These keys are 25 6-bit
numbers.
Blockchain –Alivingledgerconsisting ofallofthepreviouslyac-
cepted blocks. A full blockchain can be traced back to the ﬁrs t
transactionandshowseachsetoftransactionsnecessaryto getthe
networktoitscurrentstate.Thestructureofthenetworkma kesit
sothat,onceatransactionhasoccurred,itcannotbeundone with-
out recalculating every subsequent block. This results in a highlyrobust,securesystemthatcouldonlybehackedifmostnodes mis-
behavedandcommittedtoverifyinginvalidblocks.Thismak esthe
Bitcoin network more secure as it gets more decentralized (w ith
morenodes) [9][10].
Smart Contracts –digital contracts that complete a speciﬁed ac-
tion automatically when their terms are satisﬁed, often inc lude
payment after a number ofsteps arecompleted[14].
MoneyLaundering –“themethodbywhichallproceedsofcrime
areintegratedintothebankingsystemsandbusinessenviro nments
oftheworld”[12].
Remittance –"Theprocessofsendingmoneytoremoveanobliga-
tion.This is most often donethrough anelectronic network, wire
transfer ormail" [11].
ILLICIT MARKETPLACES
In 2011,Bitcoin spurredthe creation of one of the most sophi s-
ticatedonlineillicitmarketplaceshostedontheTORnetwo rk:Silk
Road,the“eBayofillicitdrugs”[7].Itscreator,RossUlbr icht,grew
thewebsiteinto a$1.2billiondrugring, hinging onthesucc ess of
Bitcoin’s anonymous P2P transactions [10]. Even after the w eb-
site was brought down by the FBI in 2013, numerous websites
sproutedupinits placetocontinueits goal[7].Fortunatel y,there
stillremain many traceablecomponentstoSilk Road’ssucce ssors,
namely their use of the postal service to transport drugs. Th ese
ﬂawshaveresultedinariseindrugseizuresatportsofentry (par-
ticularlyinAustralia)andimprovedtheabilityfortheDEA totrack
downdealers intheUS [10] [7].
In 2012,Small [10] reports, a well-known and revered gyneco l-
ogist, Dr. Olivia Bolles, utilized the anonymity of Bitcoin on the
Silk Road to vend controlled substances as “MDPro.” She and h er
partner, Alexandra Gold, accumulated 610 transactions in a few
months, catching the eye of the DEA. Bolles used a personal P. O.
box as the return address on her sales, however, which led to t he
DEAtracingthedrugsbacktothesource.Asimilarstoryunwo und
for the website’s founder Ross Ulbricht, or “Dead Pirate Rob erts.”
The FBI tricked Ulbricht into directing them toward a system ad-
ministrator,CurtisClarkGreen,forabuyerforbulkcocain e.When
UlbrichtbecameawarethatGreenhadbeencaughtbytheFBI,h e
hired an agent to kill Green–this spiraled into Ulbricht’s e ventual
capturein apubliclibraryonOctober1,2013.
Theseanecdotessuggestthat,althoughBitcoin’sanonymit yap-
pears to pose an unfair advantage for criminals in the drug tr ade,
the native traceability provided by the public Bitcoin bloc kchain
ispotentiallyeasiertotracethancash-onlydrugtransact ions[10].
Bitcoin continues to catalyze the market–many replacement s for
the Silk Road have since risen and fallen including Black Mar ket
Reloaded and Silk Road 2.0. There is, however, a beneﬁt to the
growthofinternet cartels:reducedviolenceand safer prod uct.Di-
rect P2P drug transactions over the internet reduce the need for
narco-traﬃckers and gangs in facilitating drug distributi on. Ac-
cordingtoJamesMartinofMacquarieUniversity[7],thisma ycur-
tail much of the violence associated with illicit drugs and, with
more direct transactions, reduce costs and increase the pur ity of
product,reducing therisk of overdoses oncuttingagents li ke fen-
tanyl.The Societal Implications of Blockchain ProliferationCC’20,March 2020,Buﬀalo, NY,
Ultimately, drug distribution is not a new problem. The natu re
of Bitcoin has only digitized it, unintentionally oﬀering a greater
meansforthefederalgovernmenttocontrolit.Martin[7]re marks
thattheratingsystememployedbytheSilkRoadimprovespro duct
purity,protectingthecustomerfrom commoncuttingagents .The
blockchainoﬀers a valuabletooltotracethesupplychain ba ck to
itssourcebyfollowingthetransactionsacrossthevarious blocksof
theledger.ThesuccessoftheFBIintracingUlbricht(andBo lles,by
theDEA)shows“thattoday’slawenforcementagencies appea rto
haveaﬁrmgrasponhowtoconductinvestigationsandsubsequ ent
prosecutions oflarge-scale illegal onlineactivities” [1 0].
MONEY LAUNDERING
From the anonymity capitalized upon by Ross Ulbricht comes
theopportunityforanotherlow-techcrimetoevolve:money laun-
dering. Small[10]reportsthat,uponitsinception,
...a number of studies analyzing the block chain [sic] of
theBitcoinledgerdemonstratedthattherewereuserswho
were placing a large amount of money into one account,
and over thecourseofafew hours,toafew days, transfer-
ring the money in small increments through hundreds of
"dummy" accounts beforeitwas recombined.
Using online casino applications, laundering was also achi eved at
the time of Bitcoin’s inception. Online casinos that oﬀer pe er-to-
peer poker games eﬀectively allow a user to intentionally lo se all
their chips to another player to launder money into their han ds
[12].AccordingtoStokes[12],in2012,anti-moneylaunder inglaws
had not yet developed to accommodate digital currencies; as a re-
sult, cryptocurrencies posed a real risk of bypassing repor ting re-
quirements.
Asof2015,moremodernmethodsofmoneylaunderingpreven-
tionhave beenlaunched which paralleltraditionaltracing mecha-
nisms. Small [10] refers to Bitcoin much as the marked bills u sed
to trace stolen ﬁat currencies. By tracing the Bitcoin throu gh the
publickeysofusers,governmentscanfollowthecurrencyin tothe
hands of a publicly identiﬁable public key, such as that of a b usi-
ness. Once the Bitcoins reach a known party, agents can use th at
informationtoﬁndtheresponsibleparty.Nakamotowasawar eof
this issue at Bitcoin’s inception, stating “[t]he risk is th at if the
owner ofakeyisrevealed, linking couldreveal othertransa ctions
that belongedtothesameowner” [9].
A simple approach to the laundering issue is regulation at th e
exchangelevel.Stokes[12]suggeststhat,whileBitcoinla cksiden-
tifying information within its ledger, if states impose reg ulations
where ﬁat money enters and exits the system, they can target a
great deal of laundering. As we will touch upon later, New Yor k
State’s BitLicense [11] is an introduction to exchange-sid e regu-
lations that require customer information to be tied to Bitc oin’s
(and other cryptocurrencies’) addresses. Thus, anytime la undered
money touchesaknownaccount’saddress (whichislikelyala rge
portion of them) it becomes trackable. There are some websit es,
however, that allow people to purchase cryptocurrency dire ctly
fromindividuals(like“localbitcoins.com”)whichmaysti llsubvert
this regulation.
Its traceability aside, there have been numerous cases thus far
ofmoneylaunderingutilizingcryptocurrency.Accordingt oDyntuandDykyi[3],inMayof2013,acompanyentitledLibertyRese rve
which maintained a system of electronic transactions laund ered
morethan$6billionacrosstheworld.Thecompanyhadmillio nsof
users which transferred money using their proprietary cryp tocur-
rency the “Liberty Dollar (LD),” directing the payment back into
USD at the endpoints. The Silk Road’s Bitcoin transactions w ere
alsocompletedusingatypeofmoneylaunderingobfuscation enti-
tled“toggle-switch.”Withit,alltransactionswerequasi -randomly
directedtotheintended user over many steps [10].
Much like with the drug trade, the anonymity of Bitcoin and
othercryptocurrencieshasproventobecircumventable,as “[a]nyone
cananalyze theblockchain [sic] and followthe trailof a sin gular
bitcoin”[10].Still,toolsexistlike“toggleswitch”andD arkWallet
which mix transactions and complicate the tracking process [3].
Websites ontheTOR network likeSilk RoadblockIP informati on
as well, another eﬀort to make tracing laundering diﬃcult on the
Bitcoinnetwork.Regulations like “BitLicense” aid in trac kingand
solving the issue of laundering, but it still remains quite p ossible
withtheuseofvariousnefarioustacticsontheblockchaina ndwith
directbitcoinexchanges (onsites like“localbitcoins.co m”).
FUNDINGTERRORISM
Another signiﬁcant risk that has arisen in the ﬁght against t er-
rorism is the use of cryptocurrencies to donate to terrorist orga-
nizations’eﬀorts.Bitcoin’scriticsbelievethatitsanon ymityposes
thepossibilityofcircumventingcounterterrorismeﬀorts [10].Small
[10] notes that eﬀorts to track down Osama bin Laden succeede d
by locating his personal courier. Had Osama bin Laden used Bi t-
coin as a means of funding, he would have needed fewer courier s
totransfer physical money–thus, hemaynever have beenloca ted
by the CIA. Often, mandatory reporting of suspicious moneta ry
transfers provides governments with clues toward ﬁnding te rror-
istcells–Bitcoincouldbypass thesemeasures.
MuchlikethepreviousrisksofBitcoinandcryptocurrency, Bit-
coin’s abilityto fund terrorism stems from its anonymity. I t, how-
ever, fails (in someregard) toreplace current systems used byter-
roristcellstotransfermoneyknownas“hawala”(“transfer ”inAra-
bic) which operates as a black-market version of Western Uni on
[10].Hawalais natively less traceablethanBitcoinasther e isn’t a
publictransactionledger builtinto thesystem where law en force-
ment can sniﬀ it out.There are currently goodcontrols emplo yed
bytheUSAtocounterhawalawhichincludestronglegalpenal ties
worldwide for performing hawala transfers. Given this intr acka-
bility of hawala relative to Bitcoin, it makes less sense to e mploy
Bitcoin’s system.
Still, with access to hawala in addition to cash couriers (li ke
thoseemployed by bin Laden), money transfer, and cryptocur ren-
cies, the funding network for terrorism becomes far more ext en-
sive. Teichmann [4] notes some intrinsic issues with Bitcoi n facil-
itating terrorism: it is diﬃcult to transfer 1,000,000 euro s without
being spotted and destination markets could be illiquid and inca-
pabletofacilitatetransfertothelocalcurrency.Thelack ofbanking
regulations, however, works in terrorism’s favor where mar kets
supportit,andanonymity addstothebeneﬁts.Cash isvery bu lky
and often diﬃcult to hide, hence why we often see photos in the
media of large rooms full of laundered bills. Bitcoin is digi tal andCC’20,March 2020,Buﬀalo, NY,
Cory Cherven
ascompactasthepaperthataprivatekeycanbestoredon,whi ch
is far easier tomove across borders.
Bitcoinholisticallyhasbeneﬁtsintheundergroundmarket sused
to support terrorism. Supporters that do not have access to ( or
that do not want to risk) hawala can easily transfer Bitcoin. Te-
ichmann [4] notes that ransom fees are often best transacted in
Bitcoin(muchlikeransomware employed oncomputers)and th at
Bitcoin is often directly convertible into weapons and muni tions
via the black market accessible by the TOR network (like the S ilk
Road).Byusingexclusivelypublicnetworksandoperatingi ncoun-
trieswithmorerelaxedregulation(likeSlovakia,whichha sBitcoin
ATMs),terroristscanhideundergovernments’radarswhile amass-
ingwealththathawalamaynototherwisesupport.Teichmann [4]
andSmall[10]bothacknowledgethecapabilitiesofBitcoin tosup-
portterrorism insomecapacity.
ENERGY CONSUMPTION AND GLOBAL
WARMING
In 2018, Camila Mora et al. [8] published a paper on the poten-
tial for Bitcoin emissions to contribute to global warming. Given
thatBitcoinrequiresitsminerstocomputecomplexhashes a tran-
dom,itrequires asigniﬁcant degreeofcomputingpowertove rify
transaction legitimacy. Mora et al. [8] estimate that Bitco in usage
in 2017 emitted 69 million tons of carbon dioxide. Should Bit coin
adoptionincreaseasforecasted,itis“capableofproducin genough
emissions to exceed 2°C of global warming in just a few decade s”
[8]. Unless the algorithms behind Bitcoin or the energy sour ces
usedarechanged,thiscouldhavedevastatingconsequences .Based
on the best Bitcoin hardware available in 2016, it is estimat ed to
consume 3.38 Terawatt hours of electricity to mine Bitcoin e ach
year. To put that into context, in 2014, Jamaica’s 2.72 milli on peo-
pleconsumed3.03 TWhofelectricity[5].
Bitcoin’s infrastructure is reliant on a series of nodes tha t ac-
cumulate copies of the blockchain and millions of miners whi ch
verifythetransactionsontheblockchain.Inordertomaint ainthe
network’s average mining rate of one block per ten minutes, t he
networkincreasesthediﬃcultyoftheminingprocess[9].As more
miners jump onboard the Bitcoin network, it takes more compu t-
ing power to mine the same number of Bitcoin, resulting in mor e
electrical demand–this issue is also exacerbated by the hal ving of
Bitcoinrewards formining every fouryears [8].
Although Bitcoin’s entire network was estimated to consume
73.12TWh in 2019, Zbinden and Kondova [14] suggest that this
is an acceptable expense in order to oﬀset the energy used by t he
bankingindustrythatBitcoinstrivestoreplace;thisincl udesCredit
cards,datacenters,oﬃces,vaults,etc.whichresultinabo ut100TWh
ofenergyconsumptionannually.Inadditiontopotentialin creases
in block size (resulting in fewer blocks) as occurred with th e Bit-
coinClassicforkandincreasedenergyeﬃciency,Zbindenan dKon-
dova [14] state that this energy use will only improve. Bitco in,
however has not succeeded in replacing the current banking i n-
frastructure. At the current rate of Bitcoin adoption, Mora et al.
[8] estimate that Bitcoin will create an energy demand capab le of
producingenoughemissionstoraiseglobaltemperatures2d egrees
over the next few decades at the slowest rate of adoption or in as
soonas 11 years.REMITTANCE
Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies are poised to make great ,
positive changes in the world of remittance, a $400 billion i ndus-
try.According toTianyi Qiu et al., currently,money remitt ance is
handledbytheSocietyofWorldwideInterbankFinancialTel ecom-
munication (SWIFT). SWIFT’s interbank messaging system co m-
pletesapproximately24milliontransactionsdaily.Thecu rrentsys-
tem relies on partnerships with independent banks to comple te
the remittance, pushing transactions through ﬁve institut ions be-
fore reaching their destinations–accumulating fees and de lays as
themoney moves. OnlytheSWIFTmessaging system (likea ship -
ment tracker) is immediate [13], the actual movement of fund s
is far slower. The cryptocurrency XRP [2] has been working to
solve the cost and delays of remittance by synchronizing the pay-
ment and messaging directly between two banks (or currencie s)
[13].Redeﬁningremittanceprotocolisalsoonthedocketfo rbusi-
nesses like BitPesa, which, Small says, is targeting Africa (speciﬁ-
cally Kenya) where remittance fees are far in excess of the no rm
(11%vs 9%,BitPesa is lookingtocharge 3%)[10].
In Mexico, the remittance industry plays a large role in fuel -
ing local economies, especially after the manufacturing gr owth
and migration of farmers resulting from the North Atlantic F ree
Trade Agreement (NAFTA). According to Zbinden and Kondova
[14],thepayments ﬂowing intoMexicocurrentlytotal$28bi llion,
10%ofMexico’stotalGDPgrowthrate.Averageglobalremitt ance
costsasof2019were7%viaproviderslikeWesternUnion.Tha nks
to the ubiquity of the Bitso and Volabit exchanges in Mexico a nd
theircryptocurrencyremittanceapplications,low-costo ptionsare
alreadyarising.
Costsarenottheonlyelementofremittancebeingimprovedb y
cryptocurrency.The SWIFT infrastructure utilized by most banks
forremittance isextremely antiquatedand delayed.Quiet a l.[13]
note that, in some regions, money transfers using the SWIFT p ro-
tocolcan take up to ﬁve days. In a SWOT (strengths, weaknesse s,
opportunities, threats) analysis of the SWIFT messaging sy stem,
they show that SWIFT’s greatest issue is its lack of control o ver
themoney transferring process:
...the real security and transaction time and cost for the
paymentstobesettledmightentirelydependonthesender
banks, intermediatebanks andreceiving banks.Theerrors
[sic] could occurwithin these processing banks which are
outofcontrolof SWIFT [13].
This system, which has much room for error, couldbe greatly i m-
proved byinvolving cryptoassets.
ThecryptocurrencyRipple(XRP) [2]proposesameanstoover -
haul or replace the SWIFT messaging system with a P2P system
based upon distributed ledger technology (DLT). Using a pub lic
blockchain, much like Bitcoin, Ripple has designed several remit-
tanceproductsthatsourceliquidityoncryptocurrencyexc hanges
oneither end ofa transactiontotransfer money. Indoingso, they
synchronize the messaging ﬂow (transaction information, s tatus,
etc.)withtheactualﬂowofvalue(theXRPcurrency) [13].Wi thin
milliseconds,twobanksareconnectedandasettlementeith ersuc-
ceeds or fails between them; the banks are also provided with a
wealth of information before the transaction such as estima tedThe Societal Implications of Blockchain ProliferationCC’20,March 2020,Buﬀalo, NY,
time, transaction fees, and exchange rates. Should there be diﬀer-
ent routes the settlement could take, multiple quotes will b e pro-
vided, and the sending institution can choose the best rate a vail-
able.Asof2018,morethan100institutionsandmorethan75c oun-
trieshavebegunusingRippletechnologyforremittance–61 banks
aloneinJapan[13].InNovemberof2019,a$50millioninvest ment
madebyRippleintoMoneyGramhassecuredtheuseoftheirtec h-
nology in several corridors, particularly the USD-MXN corr idor
(remittance betweentheUS and Mexico).This technology’s g reat-
estthreats,claimQuietal.[13],comefromadvancementsin other
cryptocurrencies, showing that blockchain will certainly develop
into a valuabletechnologyforremittance.
AIDING THETHIRD WORLD
AfricaandMexicoaretwoimportanttestinggroundsforBitc oin
andothercryptocurrenciesbeyondremittance.Africaisst illdevel-
oping into the modern world–since it lacks many infrastruct ures
including electrical, banking, and the internet, new techn ologies
areneededtocompensate.SeanButton[1]suggests thatBitc oin’s
microlending capacities (many small transactions) could a id with
thesedeﬁcitsbyallowingthesaleofexcesselectricitybac ktogrids
and providing access to loans and credit. Both Africa and Mex ico
suﬀerfromgreatpoliticalunrestandagenerallackoftrust toward
banking institutions; Bitcoin allows for a store of value se parate
the government, one that is far more stable [14] [1]. Blockch ain
can immutably house identity documents for refugees and imm i-
grants,hosttrustworthyvoting,andorganizeshippingusi ngsmart
contracts,allowingforbetter supplychain management [1] .
Poverty inMexicoposesagreat opportunityforblockchaini m-
provement. Zbinden and Kondova [14] cite that only 15 people
own 5% of Mexico’s wealth with 43.6% of peopleliving below th e
national poverty line. In 2005,less than 25% of peoplein the capi-
talusedformalﬁnancialservices(banks,ﬁnancialinstitu tions,etc.)
due to high fees, distrust, and a lack of documentation. Alth ough
63% of Mexico City’s unbanked residents own their houses, th ey
cannot legally prove ownership due to a lack of documentatio n.
Governmentcorruptionisagreatcauseofthisunbankingand pub-
lic distrustinﬁnancial institutions.
Zbinden and Kondova [14] report that Mexico, in 2017, has be-
guninvestingin“BlockchainHACKMX”whichlooksforblockc hain
solutions to corruption. The program has initiated a “smart ” pub-
lic tender which is a cashless smart-contract approach to po pu-
lar votes on important government decisions–it will, howev er, be
hosted in a private, government-controlled blockchain tha t could
still be subject to manipulation. Mexico’s supportive Fint ech (ﬁ-
nancial technology) regulations have spurred the prolifer ation of
140,000 Bitso ATMs which allow the unbanked to have Bitcoin
wallets and complete currency remittance. This pro-Fintec h, pro-
cryptocurrency environment in Mexico has great potential t o im-
prove publictrustin thegovernment’s behavior.
InAfrica,startupslikeBitHubAfricaarepushingtolaunch cryp-
tocurrency applications that aid in microlending, energy a ccess,
and crypto adoption. Button [1] notes that cryptocurrency l oans
detachindividualsfromuntrustworthycentralauthoritie sinthese
corrupt countries and reduces administration fees. Crypto curren-
cies provide a great solution for the 80% of Sub-Saharan Afri cansthat are unbanked, as supportedby Bitcoin trading 33% highe r in
Nigeria in 2017 than elsewhere in the world (greater conﬁden ce
placedincryptocurrency).Theimmutabilityoftheblockch ainposes
a great opportunityto store identiﬁcation records like bio metrics,
pictures,IDnumbers,bankinginformation,educationalcr edentials,
etc. This would allow documents to follow displaced citizen s and
reduceidentity fraud.Voting,just likeinMexico, couldbe embed-
dedinto a blockchainwhereby ID is veriﬁed, and votes aretal lied
immutably on the blockchain. Via smart contracts, shipping con-
tractscanbecloselytrackedandcompletedasmanufacturin gbur-
dens shift from China into Africa.
There is a great wealth of beneﬁts that could come to African
and Mexican (and other) societies as a result of the prolifer ation
of blockchain technology. Such technology removes corrupt gov-
ernmentsfromarbitrationandenablescitizenstofeelconﬁ dentin
their money, vote,and documentsecurity.
LEGALHURDLES
Thebiggest hurdles for blockchain development are legal on es.
Sondereggerstatesthat“Bitcoinispoisedtothreatenthev eryfoun-
dationuponwhichﬁatcurrencyandmonetarypolicyrest:cen tral-
ized control” [11]. This scares any government whose econom y
is driven by a central bank–it takes away the government’s co n-
trol. As mentioned, Bitcoin is often a haven for criminal act ivity
and its decentralization makes it very diﬃcult to inﬂuence. Fears
of rapid deﬂation caused the by ﬁxed Bitcoin supply lead expe rts
to denounce its success as a currency [11]. Many countries ha ve
continued to allow Bitcoin to ﬂourish with limited restrict ions by
classifying its risks and taxation; at least 10 countries, h owever,
have enacted complete (or near-complete) bans including Ch ina,
Iceland,Russia, and numerous others[6].
In 2013,theUS Department of the Treasury’s Financial Crime s
Enforcement Network (FinCEN) issued guidelines regarding vir-
tual currency. According to Sonderegger [11], Its guidelin es im-
posed rules upon all entities creating, obtaining, exchang ing, or
otherwisedealing in digital currencies–establishing tha tthese en-
tities are subject to the rules governing normal money trans mis-
sion.Thisbeganrequiringthatexchangesﬁlewiththefeder algov-
ernment and complywith extremely complex statelicensing. The
2014 case SEC v. Shavers ruled that Bitcoin is in fact (an inve st-
ment of) money in the US, showing that Bitcoin could be consid -
ered a security though it does not perfectly fall into the bou nds
of the “Howey Test” used to determine security status. The In ter-
nalRevenueServicehasagreedthat,regardlessofBitcoin’ sunclear
status,itwillbetaxedasaninvestment.Manystateshavead dition-
allyinstatedplanslikeNewYork’s“BitLicense”whichregu lateany
money laundering and cybersecurity risks inherent in crypt ocur-
rency via closesurveillance oftheexchanges.
Internationally,responsestocryptocurrencyhavevaried widely
from monitoring to a total ban. According to Jan Lansky [6],o nly
three countries have elected not to regulate (Croatia, Irel and, and
Japan), yet eleven countries have completely banned them. S on-
deregger[11]suggests,however,amiddle-groundapproach toreg-
ulation which mirrors the Chinese approach to cryptocurren cies
where:(1)theyarenotacurrency(rather,acommodity),(2) banks
andﬁnancialinstitutionscannottransactusingthem,(3)e xchangesCC’20,March 2020,Buﬀalo, NY,
Cory Cherven
arelegal(withgovernmentoversight),and(4)thepopulati onmust
assume all of the risk. The only variation is that, unlike Chi na,
cryptocurrencyshouldbeallowedinthepricingandpurchas ingof
goodsand services. As discussed,however, barring ﬁnancia l insti-
tutionsfromusingcryptocurrenciesposesabigriskforcur rencies
like Ripple (XRP) [2] which plan to revolutionize the remitt ance
industryand aidcompromised governments’ citizens.
CONCLUSIONS
Blockchaintechnologyispoisedtomakegreatpositivechan ges
insocietyiflegislaturesarepreparedtoconsiderthechal lenges of
asocietywhereanonymousP2Ptransactionsarethenorm.Und er
the guise of complete anonymity, the potential for expansiv e on-
line illicit marketplaces to emerge arises [10] [7], money i s more
easily launderable [12], terrorists can secure private fun ding [4],
and heavy mining costs drive carbon emissions and global war m-
ing[8].Whilemanyofthesethreatsofcryptocurrencycanbe coun-
teracted by strong regulation and the traceability of block chain
technology, some risks are still inevitable byproducts of a dvance-
ments (particularlycarbonemissions, which are unlikelyt o slow).
Thankfully, there are other consensus protocols, like Ripp le’s [2]
whichdonotdependonineﬃcientminingandhaverelativelyl ow
carbonemissions comparedtoproof-of-workconsensus.
Governments should tolerate these pitfalls for the beneﬁts in
remittance [13] [10] and for thepotential to improve corrup tgov-
ernments [14] [1] brought by blockchain technology. The tec hno-
logical implications of theunmodiﬁableblockchainprovid emany
great opportunities for the unbanked, for citizens of corru pt gov-
ernments, and for those refugees and migrants whose identit ies
must be as mobile as themselves. There is still a lot of room to
develop a legal standpoint on cryptocurrency which does not im-
pedeon its free growth, and plenty more debate surrounding t op-
icsofcybercrime(ransomware,botnetting,andthesecurit yofdis-
tributed ledger technology), cryptocurrencies as investm ent vehi-
cles,and–especially–thebeneﬁtsofcryptocurrencyforﬁr st-world
citizens (likeRipple’s Xpring initiative).
Though they come with complex consequences, digital curren -
cies provide a great opportunityfor growth across the world and,
asayoungtechnology,theyremainvastlyunexplored.Furth erde-
velopment will certainly expose greater ﬂaws and beneﬁts to the
technologyand additional legislative challenges tobeove rcome.
REFERENCES
[1] Sean Button. 2018. Cryptocurrency and Blockchains in Em erging Economies.
Software Quality Professional 20, 3(06 2018), 39–46.
[2] Brad Chase and Ethan MacBrough. 2018. Analysis of the XRP Ledger
Consensus Protocol. CoRRabs/1802.07242 (2018). arXiv:1802.07242
http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.07242
[3] V.DyntuandO.Dykyi.2018.CRYPTOCURRENCYINTHESYSTEM OFMONEY
LAUNDERING. Baltic Journal of EconomicStudies 4,5 (2018), 75–81.
[4] Johannes T. Fabian Maximilian. 2018. Financing terrori sm through cryptocur-
rencies–adangerforEurope? JournalofMoneyLaunderingControl 21,4(2018),
513–519.
[5] Steve Huckle and Martin White. 2016. Socialism and the Bl ockchain. Future
Internet8,4(2016), 49.
[6] Jan Lansky. 2018. Possible State Approaches to Cryptocu rrencies. Journal of
SystemsIntegration 9,1 (2018), 19–31.
[7] James Martin. 2014. Lost on the Silk Road: Online drug dis tribution and
the ‘cryptomarket’. Criminology & Criminal Justice 14, 3 (2014), 351–367.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1748895813505234[8] Camilo Mora, Randi L. Rollins, Katie Taladay, Michael B. Kantar, Mason K.
Chock,MioShimada,andErikC.Franklin.2018. Bitcoinemis sionsalone could
push global warming above 2°C. Nature Climate Change 8, 11 (11 2018), 931–
933.
[9] SatoshiNakamoto.2015. Bitcoin:Apeer-to-peerelectr oniccashsystem. (2015).
http://nakamotoinstitute.org/bitcoin/
[10] S.Small.2015. Bitcoin:theNapsterofcurrency. HoustonJournalofInternational
Law37, 2(2015), 581.
[11] D.Sonderegger.2015. Aregulatoryandeconomicperple xity:Bitcoinneedsjust
a bit of regulation. Washington University Journal of Law & Policy 47 (2015),
175.
[12] Robert Stokes. 2012. Virtual money laundering: the cas e of Bitcoin and the
Lindendollar. Information & CommunicationsTechnology Law 21,3 (2012), 221
– 236.
[13] R.ZhangT.QiuandY.Gao.2019. Ripplevs.SWIFT:Transf ormingCrossBorder
RemittanceUsingBlockchainTechnology. ProcediaComputerScience 147(2019),
428–434.
[14] F. Zbinden and G. Kondova. 2019. Economic Development i n Mexico and the
Role of Blockchain. Advances in Economicsand Business 7, 1(2019), 55–64.